OF

RICHARD HARDING DAVIS



EDITED BY

CHARLES BELMONT DAVIS




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I.  THE EARLY DAYS
    II.  COLLEGE DAYS
   III.  FIRST NEWSPAPER EXPERIENCES
    IV.  NEW YORK
     V.  FIRST TRAVEL ARTICLES
    VI.  THE MEDITERRANEAN AND PARIS
   VII.  FIRST PLAYS
  VIII.  CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
    IX.  MOSCOW, BUDAPEST, LONDON
     X.  CAMPAIGNING IN CUBA, AND GREECE
    XI.  THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR
   XII.  THE BOER WAR
  XIII.  THE SPANISH AND ENGLISH CORONATIONS
   XIV.  THE JAPANESE-RUSSIAN WAR
    XV.  MOUNT KISCO
   XVI.  THE CONGO
  XVII.  A LONDON WINTER
 XVIII.  MILITARY MANOEUVRES
   XIX.  VERA CRUZ AND THE GREAT WAR
    XX.  THE LAST DAYS




CHAPTER I

THE EARLY DAYS

Richard Harding Davis was born in Philadelphia on April 18, 1864, but,
so far as memory serves me, his life and mine began together several
years later in the three-story brick house on South Twenty-first
Street, to which we had just moved.  For more than forty years this was
our home in all that the word implies, and I do not believe that there
was ever a moment when it was not the predominating influence in
Richard's life and in his work.  As I learned in later years, the house
had come into the possession of my father and mother after a period on
their part of hard endeavor and unusual sacrifice.  It was their
ambition to add to this home not only the comforts and the beautiful
inanimate things of life, but to create an atmosphere which would prove
a constant help to those who lived under its roof--an inspiration to
their children that should endure so long as they lived.  At the time
of my brother's death the fact was frequently commented upon that,
unlike most literary folk, he had never known what it was to be poor
and to suffer the pangs of hunger and failure.  That he never suffered
from the lack of a home was certainly as true as that in his work he
knew but little of failure, for the first stories he wrote for the
magazines brought him into a prominence and popularity that lasted
until the end.  But if Richard gained his success early in life and was
blessed with a very lovely home to which he could always return, he was
not brought up in a manner which in any way could be called lavish.
Lavish he may have been in later years, but if he was it was with the
money for which those who knew him best knew how very hard he had
worked.

In a general way, I cannot remember that our life as boys differed in
any essential from that of other boys.  My brother went to the
Episcopal Academy and his weekly report never failed to fill the whole
house with an impenetrable gloom and ever-increasing fears as to the
possibilities of his future.  At school and at college Richard was, to
say the least, an indifferent student.  And what made this undeniable
fact so annoying, particularly to his teachers, was that morally he
stood so very high.  To "crib," to lie, or in any way to cheat or to do
any unworthy act was, I believe, quite beyond his understanding.
Therefore, while his constant lack of interest in his studies goaded
his teachers to despair, when it came to a question of stamping out
wrongdoing on the part of the student body he was invariably found
aligned on the side of the faculty.  Not that Richard in any way
resembled a prig or was even, so far as I know, ever so considered by
the most reprehensible of his fellow students.  He was altogether too
red-blooded for that, and I believe the students whom he antagonized
rather admired his chivalric point of honor even if they failed to
imitate it.  As a schoolboy he was aggressive, radical, outspoken,
fearless, usually of the opposition and, indeed, often the sole member
of his own party.  Among the students at the several schools he
attended he had but few intimate friends; but of the various little
groups of which he happened to be a member his aggressiveness and his
imagination usually made him the leader.  As far back as I can
remember, Richard was always starting something--usually a new club or
a violent reform movement.  And in school or college, as in all the
other walks of life, the reformer must, of necessity, lead a somewhat
tempestuous, if happy, existence.  The following letter, written to his
father when Richard was a student at Swarthmore, and about fifteen,
will give an idea of his conception of the ethics in the case:


SWARTHMORE--1880.

DEAR PAPA:

I am quite on the Potomac.  I with all the boys at our table were
called up, there is seven of us, before Prex. for stealing sugar-bowls
and things off the table.  All the youths said, "O President, I didn't
do it."  When it came my turn I merely smiled gravely, and he passed on
to the last.  Then he said, "The only boy that doesn't deny it is
Davis.  Davis, you are excused.  I wish to talk to the rest of them."
That all goes to show he can be a gentleman if he would only try.  I am
a natural born philosopher so I thought this idea is too idiotic for me
to converse about so I recommend silence and I also argued that to deny
you must necessarily be accused and to be accused of stealing would of
course cause me to bid Prex. good-by, so the only way was, taking these
two considerations with each other, to deny nothing but let the
good-natured old duffer see how silly it was by retaining a placid
silence and so crushing his base but thoughtless behavior and
machinations.

DICK.


In the early days at home--that is, when the sun shone--we played
cricket and baseball and football in our very spacious back yard, and
the programme of our sports was always subject to Richard's change
without notice.  When it rained we adjourned to the third-story front,
where we played melodrama of simple plot but many thrills, and it was
always Richard who wrote the plays, produced them, and played the
principal part.  As I recall these dramas of my early youth, the action
was almost endless and, although the company comprised two charming
misses (at least I know that they eventually grew into two very lovely
women), there was no time wasted over anything so sentimental or futile
as love-scenes.  But whatever else the play contained in the way of
great scenes, there was always a mountain pass--the mountains being
composed of a chair and two tables--and Richard was forever leading his
little band over the pass while the band, wholly indifferent as to
whether the road led to honor, glory, or total annihilation, meekly
followed its leader.  For some reason, probably on account of my early
admiration for Richard and being only too willing to obey his command,
I was invariably cast for the villain in these early dramas, and the
end of the play always ended in a hand-to-hand conflict between the
hero and myself.  As Richard, naturally, was the hero and incidentally
the stronger of the two, it can readily be imagined that the fight
always ended in my complete undoing.  Strangulation was the method
usually employed to finish me, and, whatever else Richard was at that
tender age, I can testify to his extraordinary ability as a choker.

But these early days in the city were not at all the happiest days of
that period in Richard's life.  He took but little interest even in the
social or the athletic side of his school life, and his failures in his
studies troubled him sorely, only I fear, however, because it troubled
his mother and father.  The great day of the year to us was the day our
schools closed and we started for our summer vacation.  When Richard
was less than a year old my mother and father, who at the time was
convalescing from a long illness, had left Philadelphia on a search for
a complete rest in the country.  Their travels, which it seems were
undertaken in the spirit of a voyage of discovery and adventure,
finally led them to the old Curtis House at Point Pleasant on the New
Jersey coast.  But the Point Pleasant of that time had very little in
common with the present well-known summer resort.  In those days the
place was reached after a long journey by rail followed by a three
hours' drive in a rickety stagecoach over deep sandy roads, albeit the
roads did lead through silent, sweet-smelling pine forests.  Point
Pleasant itself was then a collection of half a dozen big farms which
stretched from the Manasquan River to the ocean half a mile distant.
Nothing could have been more primitive or as I remember it in its
pastoral loveliness much more beautiful.  Just beyond our cottage the
river ran its silent, lazy course to the sea.  With the exception of
several farmhouses, its banks were then unsullied by human habitation
of any sort, and on either side beyond the low green banks lay fields
of wheat and corn, and dense groves of pine and oak and chestnut trees.
Between us and the ocean were more waving fields of corn, broken by
little clumps of trees, and beyond these damp Nile-green pasture
meadows, and then salty marshes that led to the glistening, white
sand-dunes, and the great silver semi-circle of foaming breakers, and
the broad, blue sea.  On all the land that lay between us and the
ocean, where the town of Point Pleasant now stands, I think there were
but four farmhouses, and these in no way interfered with the landscape
or the life of the primitive world in which we played.

Whatever the mental stimulus my brother derived from his home in
Philadelphia, the foundation of the physical strength that stood him in
such good stead in the campaigns of his later years he derived from
those early days at Point Pleasant.  The cottage we lived in was an old
two-story frame building, to which my father had added two small
sleeping-rooms.  Outside there was a vine-covered porch and within a
great stone fireplace flanked by cupboards, from which during those
happy days I know Richard and I, openly and covertly, must have
extracted tons of hardtack and cake.  The little house was called
"Vagabond's Rest," and a haven of rest and peace and content it
certainly proved for many years to the Davis family.  From here it was
that my father started forth in the early mornings on his all-day
fishing excursions, while my mother sat on the sunlit porch and wrote
novels and mended the badly rent garments of her very active sons.
After a seven-o'clock breakfast at the Curtis House our energies never
ceased until night closed in on us and from sheer exhaustion we dropped
unconscious into our patch-quilted cots.  All day long we swam or
rowed, or sailed, or played ball, or camped out, or ate enormous
meals--anything so long as our activities were ceaseless and our
breathing apparatus given no rest.  About a mile up the river there was
an island--it's a very small, prettily wooded, sandy-beached little
place, but it seemed big enough in those days.  Robert Louis Stevenson
made it famous by rechristening it Treasure Island, and writing the new
name and his own on a bulkhead that had been built to shore up one of
its fast disappearing sandy banks.  But that is very modern history and
to us it has always been "The Island."  In our day, long before
Stevenson had ever heard of the Manasquan, Richard and I had discovered
this tight little piece of land, found great treasures there, and, hand
in hand, had slept in a six-by-six tent while the lions and tigers
growled at us from the surrounding forests.

As I recall these days of my boyhood I find the recollections of our
life at Point Pleasant much more distinct than those we spent in
Philadelphia.  For Richard these days were especially welcome.  They
meant a respite from the studies which were a constant menace to
himself and his parents; and the freedom of the open country, the
ocean, the many sports on land and on the river gave his body the
constant exercise his constitution seemed to demand, and a broad field
for an imagination which was even then very keen, certainly keen enough
to make the rest of us his followers.

In an extremely sympathetic appreciation which Irvin S. Cobb wrote
about my brother at the time of his death, he says that he doubts if
there is such a thing as a born author.  Personally it so happened that
I never grew up with any one, except my brother, who ever became an
author, certainly an author of fiction, and so I cannot speak on the
subject with authority.  But in the case of Richard, if he was not born
an author, certainly no other career was ever considered.  So far as I
know he never even wanted to go to sea or to be a bareback rider in a
circus.  A boy, if he loves his father, usually wants to follow in his
professional footsteps, and in the case of Richard, he had the double
inspiration of following both in the footsteps of his father and in
those of his mother.  For years before Richard's birth his father had
been a newspaper editor and a well-known writer of stories and his
mother a novelist and short-story writer of great distinction.  Of
those times at Point Pleasant I fear I can remember but a few of our
elders.  There were George Lambdin, Margaret Ruff, and Milne Ramsay,
all painters of some note; a strange couple, Colonel Olcott and the
afterward famous Madam Blavatsky, trying to start a Buddhist cult in
this country; Mrs. Frances Hodgson Burnett, with her foot on the first
rung of the ladder of fame, who at the time loved much millinery
finery.  One day my father took her out sailing and, much to the lady's
discomfiture and greatly to Richard's and my delight, upset the famous
authoress.  At a later period the Joseph Jeffersons used to visit us;
Horace Howard Furness, one of my father's oldest friends, built a
summer home very near us on the river, and Mrs. John Drew and her
daughter Georgie Barrymore spent their summers in a near-by hostelry.
I can remember Mrs. Barrymore at that time very well---wonderfully
handsome and a marvellously cheery manner.  Richard and I both loved
her greatly, even though it were in secret.  Her daughter Ethel I
remember best as she appeared on the beach, a sweet, long-legged child
in a scarlet bathing-suit running toward the breakers and then dashing
madly back to her mother's open arms.  A pretty figure of a child, but
much too young for Richard to notice at that time.  In after-years the
child in the scarlet bathing-suit and he became great pals.  Indeed,
during the latter half of his life, through the good days and the bad,
there were very few friends who held so close a place in his sympathy
and his affections as Ethel Barrymore.

Until the summer of 1880 my brother continued on at the Episcopal
Academy.  For some reason I was sent to a different school, but outside
of our supposed hours of learning we were never apart.  With less than
two years' difference in our ages our interests were much the same, and
I fear our interests of those days were largely limited to out-of-door
sports and the theatre.  We must have been very young indeed when my
father first led us by the hand to see our first play.  On Saturday
afternoons Richard and I, unattended but not wholly unalarmed, would
set forth from our home on this thrilling weekly adventure.  Having
joined our father at his office, he would invariably take us to a
chop-house situated at the end of a blind alley which lay concealed
somewhere in the neighborhood of Walnut and Third Streets, and where we
ate a most wonderful luncheon of English chops and apple pie.  As the
luncheon drew to its close I remember how Richard and I used to fret
and fume while my father in a most leisurely manner used to finish off
his mug of musty ale.  But at last the three of us, hand in hand, my
father between us, were walking briskly toward our happy destination.
At that time there were only a few first-class theatres in
Philadelphia--the Arch Street Theatre, owned by Mrs. John Drew; the
Chestnut Street, and the Walnut Street--all of which had stock
companies, but which on the occasion of a visiting star acted as the
supporting company.  These were the days of Booth, Jefferson, Adelaide
Neilson, Charles Fletcher, Lotta, John McCullough, John Sleeper Clark,
and the elder Sothern.  And how Richard and I worshipped them all--not
only these but every small-bit actor in every stock company in town.
Indeed, so many favorites of the stage did my brother and I admire that
ordinary frames would not begin to hold them all, and to overcome this
defect we had our bedroom entirely redecorated.  The new scheme called
for a gray wallpaper supported by a maroon dado.  At the top of the
latter ran two parallel black picture mouldings between which we could
easily insert cabinet photographs of the actors and actresses which for
the moment we thought most worthy of a place in our collection.  As the
room was fairly large and as the mouldings ran entirely around it, we
had plenty of space for even our very elastic love for the heroes and
heroines of the footlights.

Edwin Forrest ended his stage career just before our time, but I know
that Richard at least saw him and heard that wonderful voice of
thunder.  It seems that one day, while my mother and Richard were
returning home, they got on a street-car which already held the great
tragedian.  At the moment Forrest was suffering severely from gout and
had his bad leg stretched well out before him.  My brother, being very
young at the time and never very much of a respecter of persons,
promptly fell over the great man's gouty foot.  Whereat (according to
my mother, who was always a most truthful narrator) Forrest broke forth
in a volcano of oaths and for blocks continued to hurl thunderous
broadsides at Richard, which my mother insisted included the curse of
Rome and every other famous tirade in the tragedian's repertory which
in any way fitted the occasion.  Nearly forty years later my father
became the president of the Edwin Forrest Home, the greatest charity
ever founded by an actor for actors, and I am sure by his efforts of
years on behalf of the institution did much to atone for Richard's
early unhappy meeting with the greatest of all the famous
leather-lunged tragedians.

From his youth my father had always been a close student of the classic
and modern drama, and throughout his life numbered among his friends
many of the celebrated actors and actresses of his time.  In those
early days Booth used to come to rather formal luncheons, and at all
such functions Richard and I ate our luncheon in the pantry, and when
the great meal was nearly over in the dining-room we were allowed to
come in in time for the ice-cream and to sit, figuratively, at the feet
of the honored guest and generally, literally, on his or her knees.
Young as I was in those days I can readily recall one of those
lunch-parties when the contrast between Booth and Dion Boucicault
struck my youthful mind most forcibly.  Booth, with his deep-set, big
black eyes, shaggy hair, and lank figure, his wonderfully modulated
voice, rolled out his theories of acting, while the bald-headed, rotund
Boucicault, his twinkling eyes snapping like a fox-terrier's,
interrupted the sonorous speeches of the tragedian with crisp, witty
criticisms or "asides" that made the rest of the company laugh and even
brought a smile to the heavy, tragic features of Booth himself.  But
there was nothing formal about our relations with John Sleeper Clark
and the Jefferson family.  They were real "home folks" and often
occupied our spare room, and when they were with us Richard and I were
allowed to come to all the meals, and, even if unsolicited, freely
express our views on the modern drama.

In later years to our Philadelphia home came Henry Irving and his
fellow player Ellen Terry and Augustin Daly and that wonderful quartet,
Ada Rehan, Mrs. Gilbert, James Lewis, and our own John Drew.  Sir Henry
I always recall by the first picture I had of him in our dining-room,
sitting far away from the table, his long legs stretched before him,
peering curiously at Richard and myself over black-rimmed glasses and
then, with equal interest, turning back to the ash of a long cigar and
talking drama with the famous jerky, nasal voice but always with a
marvellous poise and convincing authority.  He took a great liking to
Richard in those days, sent him a church-warden's pipe that he had used
as Corporal Brewster, and made much of him later when my brother was in
London.  Miss Terry was a much less formal and forbidding guest,
rushing into the house like a whirlwind and filling the place with the
sunshine and happiness that seemed to fairly exude from her beautiful
magnetic presence.  Augustin Daly usually came with at least three of
the stars of his company which I have already mentioned, but even the
beautiful Rehan and the nice old Mrs. Gilbert seemed thoroughly awed in
the presence of "the Guv'nor."  He was a most crusty, dictatorial
party, as I remember him with his searching eyes and raven locks,
always dressed in black and always failing to find virtue in any actor
or actress not a member of his own company.  I remember one
particularly acrid discussion between him and my father in regard to
Julia Marlowe, who was then making her first bow to the public.  Daly
contended that in a few years the lady would be absolutely unheard of
and backed his opinion by betting a dinner for those present with my
father that his judgment would prove correct.  However, he was very
kind to Richard and myself and frequently allowed us to play about
behind the scenes, which was a privilege I imagine he granted to very
few of his friends' children.  One night, long after this, when Richard
was a reporter in New York, he and Miss Rehan were burlesquing a scene
from a play on which the last curtain had just fallen.  It was on the
stage of Daly's theatre at Thirtieth Street and Broadway, and from his
velvet box at the prompt-entrance Daly stood gloomily watching their
fooling.  When they had finished the mock scene Richard went over to
Daly and said, "How bad do you think I am as an actor, Mr. Daly?" and
greatly to my brother's delight the greatest manager of them all of
those days grumbled back at him:  "You're so bad, Richard, that I'll
give you a hundred dollars a week, and you can sign the contract
whenever you're ready."  Although that was much more than my brother
was making in his chosen profession at the time, and in spite of the
intense interest he had in the theatre, he never considered the offer
seriously.  As a matter of fact, Richard had many natural
qualifications that fitted him for the stage, and in after-years, when
he was rehearsing one of his own plays, he could and frequently would
go up on the stage and read almost any part better than the actor
employed to do it.  Of course, he lacked the ease of gesture and the
art of timing which can only be attained after sound experience, but
his reading of lines and his knowledge of characterization was quite
unusual.  In proof of this I know of at least two managers who, when
Richard wanted to sell them plays, refused to have him read them the
manuscript on the ground that his reading gave the dialogue a value it
did not really possess.

In the spring of 1880 Richard left the Episcopal Academy, and the
following September went to Swarthmore College, situated just outside
of Philadelphia.  I fear, however, the change was anything but a
success.  The life of the big coeducational school did not appeal to
him at all and, in spite of two or three friendships he made among the
girls and boys, he depended for amusement almost wholly on his own
resources.  In the afternoons and on holidays he took long walks over
the country roads and in search of adventure visited many farmhouses.
His excuse for these calls was that he was looking for old furniture
and china, and he frequently remained long enough to make sketches of
such objects as he pretended had struck his artistic fancy.  Of these
adventures he wrote at great length to his mother and father, and the
letters were usually profusely decorated with illustrations of the most
striking incidents of the various escapades.  Several of these
Swarthmore experiences he used afterward in short stories, and both the
letters and sketches he sent to his parents at the time he regarded in
the light of preparation for his future work.  In his studies he was
perhaps less successful than he had been at the Episcopal Academy, and
although he played football and took part in the track sports he was
really but little interested in either.  There were half-holidays on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, and when my brother did not come to town I
went to Swarthmore and we spent the afternoons in first cooking our
lunch in a hospitable woods and then playing some games in the open
that Richard had devised.  But as I recall these outings they were not
very joyous occasions, as Richard was extremely unhappy over his
failures at school and greatly depressed about the prospects for the
future.

He finished the college year at Swarthmore, but so unhappy had he been
there that there was no thought in his mind or in that of his parents
of his returning.  At that time my uncle, H.  Wilson Harding, was a
professor at Lehigh University, and it was arranged that Richard should
go to Bethlehem the following fall, live with his uncle, and continue
his studies at Ulrich's Preparatory School, which made a specialty of
preparing boys for Lehigh.  My uncle lived in a charming old house on
Market Street in Bethlehem, quite near the Moravian settlement and
across the river from the university and the iron mills.  He was a
bachelor, but of a most gregarious and hospitable disposition, and
Richard therefore found himself largely his own master, in a big, roomy
house which was almost constantly filled with the most charming and
cultivated people.  There my uncle and Richard, practically of about
the same age so far as their viewpoint of life was concerned, kept open
house, and if it had not been for the occasional qualms his innate
hatred of mathematics caused him, I think my brother would have been
completely happy.  Even studies no longer worried him particularly and
he at once started in to make friendships, many of which lasted
throughout his life.  As is usual with young men of seventeen, most of
these men and women friends were several times Richard's age, but at
the period Richard was a particularly precocious and amusing youth and
a difference of a few decades made but little difference--certainly not
to Richard.  Finley Peter Dunne once wrote of my brother that he
"probably knew more waiters, generals, actors, and princes than any man
who lived," and I think it was during the first year of his life at
Bethlehem that he began the foundation for the remarkable collection of
friends, both as to numbers and variety, of which he died possessed.
Although a "prep," he made many friends among the undergraduates of
Lehigh.  He made friends with the friends of his uncle and many friends
in both of the Bethlehems of which his uncle had probably never heard.
Even at that early age he counted among his intimates William W.
Thurston, who was president of the Bethlehem Iron Company, and J. Davis
Brodhead, one of Pennsylvania's most conspicuous Democratic congressmen
and attorneys.  Those who knew him at that time can easily understand
why Richard attracted men and women so much older than himself.  He was
brimming over with physical health and animal spirits and took the
keenest interest in every one he met and in everything that was going
on about him.  And in the broadest sense he saw to it then, as he did
throughout his life, that he always did his share.

During those early days at Bethlehem his letters to his family were
full of his social activities, with occasional references to his work
at school.  He was always going to dinners or dances, entertaining
members of visiting theatrical companies; and on Friday night my mother
usually received a telegram, saying that he would arrive the next day
with a party of friends whom he had inadvertently asked to lunch and a
matinee.  It was after one of these weekly visits that my mother wrote
Richard the following:


Monday Night.  MY DARLING Boy:


You went off in such a hurry that it took my breath at the last.  You
say coming down helps you.  It certainly does me.  It brings a real
sunshine to Papa and me.  He was saying that to-day.  I gave Nolly a
sort of holiday after her miseries last night.  We went down street and
got Papa a present for our wedding day, a picture, after all, and then
I took Miss Baker some tickets for a concert.  I saw her father who
said he "must speak about my noble looking boy."  I always thought him
a genius but now I think him a man of penetration as well.  Then Nolly
and I went over to see the Russians.  But they are closely boxed up and
not allowed to-day to see visitors.  So we came home cross and hungry.
All evening I have been writing business letters.

Papa has gone to a reception and Charley is hard at work at his desk.

I answered Mr. Allen's letter this morning, dear, and told him you
would talk to him.  When you do, dear, talk freely to him as to me.
You will not perhaps agree with all he says.  But your own thoughts
will be healthier for bringing them--as I might say, out of doors.  You
saw how it was by coming down here.  Love of Christ is not a melancholy
nor a morbid thing, dear love, but ought to make one more social and
cheerful and alive.

I wish you could come home oftener.  Try and get ahead with lessons so
that you can come oftener.  And when you feel as if prayer was a
burden, stop praying and go out and try to put your Christianity into
real action by doing some kindness--even speaking in a friendly way to
somebody.  Bring yourself into contact with new people--not John, Hugh,
Uncle and Grandma, and try to act to them as Christ would have you act,
and my word for it, you will go home with a new light on your own
relations to Him and a new meaning for your prayers.  You remember the
prayer "give me a great thought to refresh me." I think you will find
some great thoughts in human beings--they will help you to understand
yourself and God, when you try to help them God makes you happy my
darling.

MAMA.


It was in this year that Richard enjoyed the thrill of seeing in print
his first contribution to a periodical.  The date of this important
event, important, at least, to my brother, was February 1, the
fortunate publication was Judge, and the effusion was entitled "The Hat
and Its Inmate."  Its purport was an overheard conversation between two
young ladies at a matinee and the editors thought so well of it that
for the privilege of printing the article they gave Richard a year's
subscription to Judge.  His scrap-book of that time shows that in 1884
Life published a short burlesque on George W.  Cable's novel, "Dr.
Sevier," and in the same year The Evening Post paid him  $1.05 for an
article about "The New Year at Lehigh."  It was also in the spring of
1884 that Richard published his first book, "The Adventures of My
Freshman," a neat little paper-covered volume including half a dozen of
the short stories that had already appeared in The Lehigh Burr.  In
writing in a copy of this book in later years, Richard said:  "This is
a copy of the first book of mine published.  My family paid to have it
printed and finding no one else was buying it, bought up the entire
edition.  Finding the first edition had gone so quickly, I urged them
to finance a second one, and when they were unenthusiastic I was hurt.
Several years later when I found the entire edition in our attic, I
understood their reluctance.  The reason the book did not sell is, I
think, because some one must have read it."

In the summer of 1882 Richard went to Boston, and in the following
letter unhesitatingly expressed his opinion of that city and its people.


BOSTON, Wednesday.

July 1882.

DEAR FAMILY:--

I left Newport last night or rather this morning.  I stopped at Beverly
and called on Dr. Holmes.  He talked a great deal about mama and about
a great many other things equally lovely in a very easy, charming way.
All I had to do was to listen and I was only too willing to do that.
We got along splendidly.  He asked me to stay to dinner but I refused
with thanks, as I had only come to pay my respects and put off to Dr.
Bartol's.  Dr. Holmes accompanied me to the depot and saw me safely
off.  Of all the lovely men I ever saw Dr. Bartol is the one.  He lives
in a great, many roomed with as many gables, house.  Elizabethan, of
course, with immense fireplaces, brass and dark woods, etchings and
engravings, with the sea and rocks immediately under the window and the
ocean stretching out for miles, lighthouses and more Elizabethan houses
half hid on the bank, and ships and small boats pushing by within a
hundred rods of the windows.  I stayed to dinner there and we had a
very jolly time.  There were two other young men and another maiden
besides Miss Bartol.  They talked principally about the stage; that is,
the Boston Stock Company, which is their sole thought and knowledge of
the drama.  The Dr. would strike off now and then to philosophizing and
moralizing but his daughter would immediately sit upon him, much to my
disgust but to the evident relief of the rest.  His wife is as lovely
as he is but I can't give it to you all now.  Wait until I get home.

The young lady, the youths and myself came up to Boston together and
had as pleasant a ride, as the heat would allow.  I left them at the
depot and went up to the Parker House and then to the Art Museum.  The
statuary is plaster, the coins are copies, and by the way, I found one
exactly like mine, which, if it is genuine is worth, "well
considerable", as the personage in charge remarked.  The pictures were
simply vile, only two or three that I recognized and principally Millet
and some charcoal sketches of Hunt's, who is the Apostle of Art here.
The china was very fine but they had a collection of old furniture and
armor which was better than anything else.  Fresh from or rather musty
from these antiques, who should I meet but the cheerful Dixey and
Powers.  We had a very jolly talk and I enjoyed it immensely, not only
myself but all the surrounding populace, as Dixey would persist in
showing the youthful some new "gag," and would break into a clog or
dialect much to the delectation of the admiring Bostonians.  I am
stranded here for to night and will push on to Newport to-morrow.  I'll
go see the "babes" to night, as there is nothing else in the city that
is worth seeing that I haven't investigated.  I left the
Newburyportians in grief with regret.  I met lots of nice people and
every one was so very kind to me, from the authoresses to the serving
maids.  Good-bye.

DICK.




CHAPTER II

COLLEGE DAYS

In the fall of 1882 Richard entered Lehigh, but the first year of his
college life varied very little from the one he had spent in the
preparatory school.  During that year he had met most of the upper
classmen, and the only difference was that he could now take an active
instead of a friendly interest in the life and the sports of the
college.  Also he had formed certain theories which he promptly
proceeded to put into practical effect.  Perhaps the most conspicuous
of these was his belief that cane-rushes and hazing were wholly
unnecessary and barbarous customs, and should have no place in the
college of his day.  Against the former he spoke at college meetings,
and wrote long letters to the local papers decrying the custom.  His
stand against hazing was equally vehement, and he worked hand in hand
with the faculty to eradicate it entirely from the college life.  That
his stand was purely for a principle and not from any fear of personal
injury, I think the following letter to his father will show:


BETHLEHEM, February 1882.

DEAR DAD:

You may remember a conversation we had at Squan about hazing in which
you said it was a very black-guardly thing and a cowardly thing.  I
didn't agree with you, but when I saw how it really was and how silly
and undignified it was, besides being brutal, I thought it over and
changed my mind completely, agreeing with you in every respect.  A
large number of our class have been hazed, taking it as a good joke,
and have been laughed at by the whole college.  I talked to the boys
about it, and said what I would do and so on, without much effect.
Wednesday a junior came to me, and told me I was to be hazed as I left
the Opera House Friday night.  After that a great many came to me and
advised and warned me as to what I should do.  I decided to get about
fifty of our class outside and then fight it out; that was before I
changed my mind.  As soon as I did I regretted it very much, but, as it
turned out, the class didn't come, so I was alone, as I wished to be.
You see, I'd not a very good place here; the fellows looked on me as a
sort of special object of ridicule, on account of the hat and cane,
walk, and so on, though I thought I'd got over that by this time.  The
Opera House was partly filled with college men, a large number of
sophomores and a few upper class men.  It was pretty generally known I
was going to have a row, and that brought them as much as the show.
Poor Ruff was in agony all day.  He supposed I'd get into the fight,
and he knew he'd get in, too, sooner or later.  If he did he'd be held
and not be able to do anything, and then the next day be blamed by the
whole college for interfering in a class matter.  He hadn't any money
to get into the show, and so wandered around outside in the rain in a
great deal more excited state than I was.  Howe went all over town
after putting on his old clothes, in case of personal damage, in search
of freshmen who were at home out of the wet.  As I left the building a
man grabbed me by my arm, and the rest, with the seniors gathered
around; the only freshman present, who was half scared to death, clung
as near to me as possible.  I withdrew my arm and faced them.  "If this
means hazing," I said, "I'm not with you.  There's not enough men here
to haze me, but there's enough to thrash me, and I'd rather be thrashed
than hazed."  You see, I wanted them to understand exactly how I looked
at it, and they wouldn't think I was simply hotheaded and stubborn.  I
was very cool about it all.  They broke in with all sorts of
explanations; hazing was the last thing they had thought of.  No,
indeed, Davis, old fellow, you're mistaken.  I told them if that was
so, all right, I was going home.  I saw several of my friends in the
crowd waiting for me, but as I didn't want them to interfere, I said
nothing, and they did not recognize me.  When among the crowd of
sophomores, the poor freshman made a last effort, he pulled me by the
coat and begged me to come with him.  I said no, I was going home.
When I reached the next corner I stopped.  "I gave you fair warning,
keep off.  I tell you I'll strike the first man, the first one, that
touches me."  Then the four who had been appointed to seize me jumped
on me, and I only got one good blow in before they had me down in the
gutter and were beating me on the face and head.  I put my hands across
my face, and so did not get any hard blows directly in the face.  They
slipped back in a moment, and when I was ready I scrambled up pretty
wet and muddy, and with my face stinging where they had struck.  It had
all been done so quickly, and there was such a large crowd coming from
the theatre, that, of course, no one saw it.  When I got up there was a
circle all around me.  They hadn't intended to go so far.  The men,
except those four who had beaten me, were rather ashamed and wished
they were out of it.  I turned to Emmerich, a postgraduate, and told
him to give me room.  "Now," I said, "you're not able to haze me, and I
can't thrash twelve of you, but I'll fight any one man you bring out."
I asked for the man that struck me, and named another, but there was no
response.

The upper classmen, who had just arrived, called out that was fair, and
they'd see it fair.  Goodnough, Purnell and Douglas, who don't like me
much, either.  Ruff was beside me by this time.

He hadn't seen anything of it, and did not get there until he heard me
calling for a fair chance and challenging the class for a man.  I
called out again, the second time, and still no one came, so I took
occasion to let them know why I had done as I did in a short speech to
the crowd.  I said I was a peaceable fellow, thought hazing silly, and
as I never intended to haze myself, I didn't intend any one to haze me.
Then I said again, "This is the third time, will one of your men fight
this fair?  I can't fight twelve of you."  Just then two officers who
had called on some mill-hands, who are always dying for a fight, and a
citizen to help them, burst into the crowd of students, shouldering
them around like sheep until they got to me, when one of them put his
arm around me, and said, "I don't know anything about this crowd, but
I'll see you're protected, sir.  I'll give 'em fair play."  One officer
got hold of Ruff and pretty near shook him to pieces until I had to
interfere and explain.  They were for forming a body-guard, and were
loud in their denunciations of the college, and declaring they'd see me
through if I was a stranger to 'em.

Two or three of the sophomores, when they saw how things were going,
set up a yell, but Griffin struck out and sent one of them flying one
way and his hat another, so the yells ended.  Howe and Murray Stuart
took me up to their rooms, and Ruff went off for beefsteak for my eye,
and treated the crowd who had come to the rescue, at Dixon's, to beer.
The next day was Saturday, and as there was to be a meeting of the
Athletic Association, of course, I wanted to show up.  The fellows all
looked at my eye pretty hard and said nothing.  I felt pretty sure that
the sympathy was all with me.

Four men are elected from the college to be on the athletic committee.
They can be nominated by any one, though generally it is done by a man
in their own class.  We had agreed the day before to vote for Tolman
for our class, so when the president announced nominations were in
order for the freshmen class, Tolman was instantly nominated.  At the
same time one of the leading sophomores jumped up and nominated Mr.
Davis, and a number of men from the same class seconded it.  I knew
every one in the college knew of what had happened, and especially the
sophomores, so I was, of course, very much surprised.  I looked
unconscious, though, and waited.  One of the seniors asked that the
nominees should stand up, as they didn't know their names only their
faces.  As each man rose he was hissed and groaned down again.  When I
stood up the sophomores burst into a yell and clapped and stamped,
yelling, "Davis!  Davis!  vote for D!" until I sat down.  As I had
already decided to nominate Tolman, I withdrew my name from the
nominees, a movement which was received by loud cries of "No!  No!"
from the sophs.  So, you see, Dad, I did as you said, as I thought was
right, and came out well indeed.  You see, I am now the hero of the
hour, every one in town knows it, and every one congratulates me, and,
"Well done, me boy," as Morrow '83 said, seems to be the idea, one gets
taken care of in this world if you do what's the right thing, if it is
only a street fight.  In fact, as one of the seniors said, I've made
five friends where I had one before.  The sophs are ashamed and sorry,
as their conduct in chapel, which was more marked, than I made it,
shows.  I've nothing to show for it but a red mark under the eye, and
so it is the best thing that could possibly have happened.  Poor Ruff
hugged me all the way home, and I've started out well in a good way, I
think, though not a very logical one.

Uncle says to tell you that my conduct has his approval throughout.

DICK.


To which letter my father promptly replied:


PHILADELPHIA.  February 25th, 1882.

DEAR OLD BOY:

I'm glad the affair ended so well.  I don't want you to fight, but if
you have to fight a cuss like that do it with all your might, and don't
insist that either party shall too strictly observe the Markis O'
Queensbury rules.  Hit first and hardest so that thine adversary shall
beware of you.

DAD.


At that time the secret societies played a very important part in the
college life at Lehigh, and while I do not believe that Richard shared
the theory of some of the students that they were a serious menace to
the social fabric, he was quite firm in his belief that it was
inadvisable to be a member of any fraternity.  In a general way he did
not like the idea of secrecy even in its mildest form, and then, as
throughout his life, he refused to join any body that would in any way
limit his complete independence of word or action.  In connection with
this phase of his college life I quote from an appreciation which M. A.
De W. Howe, one of Richard's best friends both at college and in
after-life, wrote for The Lehigh Burr at the time of my brother's death:

"To the credit of the perceptive faculty of undergraduates, it ought to
be said that the classmates and contemporaries of Richard Harding Davis
knew perfectly well, while he and they were young together, that in him
Lehigh had a son so marked in his individuality, so endowed with
talents and character that he stood quite apart from the other
collegians of his day.  Prophets were as rare in the eighties as they
have always been, before and since, and nobody could have foreseen that
the name and work of Dick Davis would long before his untimely death,
indeed within a few years from leaving college, be better known
throughout the world than those of any other Lehigh man.  We who knew
him in his college days could not feel the smallest surprise that he
won himself quickly a brilliant name, and kept a firm hold upon it to
the last.

"What was it that made him so early a marked man?  I think it was the
spirit of confidence and enthusiasm which turned every enterprise he
undertook into an adventure,--the brave and humorous playing of the
game of life, the true heart, the wholesome body and soul of my friend
and classmate.  He did not excel in studies or greatly, in athletics.
But in his own field, that of writing, he was so much better than the
rest of us that no one of his fellow-editors of the Epitome or Burr
needed to be considered in comparison with him.  No less, in spite of
his voluntary nonmembership in the fraternities of his day, was he a
leader in the social activities of the University.  The 'Arcadian Club'
devoted in its beginnings to the 'pipes, books, beer and gingeralia' of
Davis's song about it and the 'Mustard and Cheese' were his creations.
In all his personal relationships he was the most amusing and
stimulating of companions.  With garb and ways of unique
picturesqueness, rarer even in college communities a generation ago
than at present, it was inevitable that he sometimes got himself
laughed at as well as with.  But what did it all matter, even then?
To-day it adds a glow of color to what would be in any case a vivid,
deeply valued memory.

"It is hard to foresee in youth what will come most sharply and
permanently in the long run.  After all these years it is good to find
that Davis and what his companionship gave one hold their place with
the strongest influences of Lehigh."

But Richard was naturally gregarious and at heart had a great fondness
for clubs and social gatherings.  Therefore, having refused the offer
of several fraternities that did him the honor to ask him to become a
member, it was necessary for him to form a few clubs that held
meetings, but no secrets.  Perhaps the most successful of these were
"The Mustard and Cheese," a dramatic club devoted to the presentation
of farces and musical comedies, and The Arcadia Club, to the
fortnightly meetings of which he devoted much time and thought.  The
following letter to his father will give some idea of the scope of the
club, which, as in the case of "The Mustard and Cheese," gained a
permanent and important place in the social life of Lehigh.


DEAR DAD:

We have started the best sort of a club up here which I am anxious to
tell you of.  It consists of a spread, net price of which will be about
30 cents each, every two or three weeks.  Only six fellows belong and
those the best of the College.  Purnell, Haines and myself founded it.
I chose Charley, Purnell, Reeves, Haines and Howe.  We will meet
Saturday nights at 9 so as not to interfere with our work, and sing,
read, eat and box until midnight.  It is called the "Pipe and Bowl,"
and is meant to take the place that The Hasty Pudding, Hammer and Tongs
and Mermaid do at other colleges.  Two of us are to invite two
outsiders in turn each meeting.  We will hope to have Dad a member,
honorary, of course, when we can persuade him to give us a night off
with his company.  We want to combine a literary feature and so will
have selected readings to provoke discussions after the pipes are lit.
The men are very enthusiastic about it and want to invite Mr. Allen and
you and every one that they can make an honorary member of immediately.


It was first as an associate editor and afterward as editor-in-chief of
the college paper, The Lehigh Burr, that Richard found his greatest
pleasure and interest during his three years at Lehigh.  In addition to
his editorial duties he wrote a very great part of every issue of the
paper, and his contributions included short stories, reports of news
events, editorials, and numerous poems.

As, after his life at college, Richard dropped verse as a mode of
expression, I reprint two of the poems which show him in the lighter
vein of those early days.

A COMMENCEMENT IDYL

     "I'm a Freshman who has ended his first year,
               But I'm new;
     And I do whate'er the Juniors, whom I fear,
               Bid me do.
          Under sudden showers I thrive;
          To be bad and bold I strive,
          But they ask--'Is it alive?'
          So they do.

     I'm a Sophomore who has passed off his exams,
               Let me loose!
     With a mark as high as any other man's,
               As obtuse
          I'm fraternal.  I am Jolly.
          I am seldom melancholy
          And to bone I think is folly,
               What's the use?


I'm a Junior whom exams. have left forlorn,
               Flunked me dead;
So I'll keep the town awake 'till early morn;
               Paint it red.
          At class-meetings I'm a kicker,
          Take no water with my liquor,
          And a dumb-bell's not thicker
               Than my head.

I'm a Senior whose diploma's within reach,
               Eighty-four.
On Commencement Day you'll hear my maiden-speech;
               I will soar!
          I got through without condition;
          I'm a mass of erudition;
          Do you know of a position!"



                         OUR STREET


          "Our street is still and silent,
               Grass grows from curb to curb,

       No baker's bells
          With jangling knells
               Our studious minds disturb.
          No organ grinders ever call,
               No hucksters mar our peace;
          For traffic shuns our neighborhood
               And leaves us to our ease.


          But now it lives and brightens,
                    Assumes a livelier hue;
               The pavements wide,
               On either side,
                    Would seem to feel it too.
               You might not note the difference,
                    The change from grave to gay,
               But I can tell, and know full well,
                    Priscilla walks our way."



Shortly after his return to college Richard celebrated his nineteenth
birthday, and received these letters from his father and mother:

April 17th, 1883.

MY DEAR BOY:

When I was thinking what I could give to you to-morrow, I remembered
the story of Herder, who when he was old and weak and they brought him
food and wine asked for "a great thought to quicken him."

So I have written some old sayings for you that have helped me.  Maybe,
this year, or some other year, when I am not with you, they may give
you, sometimes, comfort and strength.

God bless you my son--

YOUR OLD MOTHER

who loves you dearly--dearly.


THE PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER
  PHILADELPHIA, April 17th, 1883.

MY DEAR BOY:

You are to be nineteen years old on Wednesday.  After two years more
you will be a man.  You are so manly and good a boy that I could not
wish you to change in any serious or great thing.  You have made us
very happy through being what you have been, what you are.  You fill us
with hope of your future virtue and usefulness.

To be good is the best thing of all; it counts for more than anything
else in the world.  We are very grateful that you have even in youth
been wise enough to choose the right road.  You will find it not easy
to keep upon it always, but remember if you do get off struggle back to
it.  I do not know but I think God loves the effort to do as well as
the act done.

I congratulate you my dear son, on your new birthday.  I wish you
health, happiness and God's loving care.  May he bless you my son
forever.  I enclose a trifle for your pleasure.  My love to you always,
but God bless you dear Dick.

DAD.


In the fall of 1885, Richard decided to leave Lehigh and go to John
Hopkins University, where he took a special course in such studies as
would best benefit him in the career which he had now carefully
planned.  During this year in Baltimore Richard's letters show that he
paid considerable attention to such important subjects as political
economy and our own labor problems, but they also show that he did not
neglect football or the lighter social diversions.  In a short space of
time he had made many friends, was very busy going to dinners and
dances, and had fallen in love with an entirely new set of maids and
matrons.  Richard had already begun to send contributions to the
magazines, and an occasional acceptance caused him the satisfaction
common to all beginners.  It was in regard to one of these early
contributions that my mother wrote Richard the following letter:


PHILADELPHIA

January 1887.

DEAR BOY:

What has become of The Current?  It has not come yet.  If it has
suspended publication be sure and get your article back.  You must not
destroy a single page you write.  You will find every idea of use to
you hereafter.

Sometimes I am afraid you think I don't take interest enough in your
immediate success now with the articles you send.  But I've had thirty
years experience and I know how much that sort of success depends on
the articles suiting the present needs of the magazine, and also on the
mood of the editor when he reads it.

Besides--except for your own disappointment--I know it would be better
if you would not publish under your own name for a little while.  Dr.
Holland--who had lots of literary shrewdness both as writer and
publisher--used to say for a young man or woman to rush into print was
sure ruin to their lasting fame.  They either compromised their
reputations by inferior work or they made a great hit and never played
up to it, afterwards, in public opinion.

Now my dear old man this sounds like awfully cold comfort.  But it is
the wisest idea your mother has got.  I confess I have GREAT faith in
you--and I try to judge you as if you were not my son.  I think you are
going to take a high place among American authors, but I do not think
you are going to do it by articles like that you sent to The Current.
The qualities which I think will bring it to you, you don't seem to
value at all.  They are your dramatic eye.  I mean your quick
perception of character and of the way character shows itself in looks,
tones, dress, etc., and in your keen sympathy--with all kinds of
people--Now, these are the requisites for a novelist.  Added to that
your humour.

You ought to make a novelist of the first class.  But you must not
expect to do it this week or next.  A lasting, real success takes time,
and patient, steady work.  Read Boz's first sketches of "London Life"
and compare them with "Sydney Carton" or "David Copperfield" and you
will see what time and hard work will do to develop genius.

I suppose you will wonder why I am moved to say all this?  It is, I
think, because of your saying "the article sent to St.  Nicholas was
the best you would be able to do for years to come" and I saw you were
going to make it a crucial test of your ability.  That is, forgive me,
nothing but nonsense.  Whatever the article may be, you may write one
infinitely superior to it next week or month.  Just in proportion as
you feel more deeply, or notice more keenly, and as you acquire the
faculty of expressing your feelings or observations more delicately and
powerfully which faculty must come into practice.  It is not
inspiration--it never was that--without practice, with any writer from
Shakespeare down.

me.  I don't say, like Papa, stop writing.  God forbid.  I would almost
as soon say stop breathing, for it is pretty much the same thing.  But
only to remember that you have not yet conquered your art.  You are a
journeyman not a master workman, so if you don't succeed, it does not
count.  The future is what I look to, for you.  I had to stop my work
to say all this, so good-bye dear old chum.

Yours,

MOTHER.


If anything worried Richard at all at this period, I think it was his
desire to get down to steady newspaper work, or indeed any kind of work
that would act as the first step of his career and by which he could
pay his own way in the world.  It was with this idea uppermost in his
mind in the late spring of 1886, and without any particular regret for
the ending of his college career, that he left Baltimore and, returning
to his home in Philadelphia, determined to accept the first position
that presented itself.  But instead of going to work at once, he once
more changed his plans and decided to sail for Santiago de Cuba with
his friend William W. Thurston, who as president of the Bethlehem Steel
Company, was deeply interested in the iron mines of that region.  Here
and then it was that Richard first fell in love with Cuba--a love which
in later years became almost an obsession with him.  Throughout his
life whenever it was possible, and sometimes when it seemed practically
impossible, my brother would listen to the call of his beloved tropics
and, casting aside all responsibilities, would set sail for Santiago.
After all it was quite natural that he should feel as he did about this
little Cuban coast town, for apart from its lazy life, spicy smells,
waving palms and Spanish cooking, it was here that he found the
material for his first novel and greatest monetary success, "Soldiers
of Fortune."  Apart from the many purely pleasure trips he made to
Santiago, twice he returned there to work--once as a correspondent
during the Spanish-American War, and again when he went with Augustus
Thomas to assist in the latter's film version of the play which years
before Thomas had made from the novel.




CHAPTER III

FIRST NEWSPAPER EXPERIENCES

In the late summer of 1886 Richard returned from Cuba and settled down
in Philadelphia to write an article about his experiences at Santiago
and to look for regular newspaper work.  Early in September he wrote
his mother:


September, 1886.

DEAR MOTHER:

I saw the Record people to-day.  They said there was not an opening but
could give me "chance" work, that is, I was to report each day at one
and get what was left over.  I said I would take it as I would have my
mornings free to write the article and what afternoons I did not have
newspaper work besides.  This is satisfactory.  They are either doing
all they can to oblige Dad or else giving me a trial trip before making
an opening.  The article is progressing but slowly.  To paraphrase
Talleyrand, what's done is but little and that little is not good.
However, since your last letter full of such excellent "tips" I have
rewritten it and think it is much improved.  I will write to Thurston
concerning the artist to-morrow.  He is away from B. at present.  On
the whole the article is not bad.


Your boy, DICK.


Richard's stay on The Record, however, was short-lived.  His excuse for
the brevity of the experience was given in an interview some years
later.  "My City Editor didn't like me because on cold days I wore
gloves.  But he was determined to make me work, and gave me about
eighteen assignments a day, and paid me $7. a week.  At the end of
three months he discharged me as incompetent."

From The Record Richard went to The Press, which was much more to his
liking, and, indeed it was here that he did his first real work and
showed his first promise.  For nearly three years he did general
reporting and during this time gained a great deal more personal
success than comes to most members of that usually anonymous
profession.  His big chance came with the Johnstown flood, and the news
stories he wired to his paper showed the first glimpse of his ability
as a correspondent.  Later on, disguised as a crook, he joined a gang
of yeggmen, lived with them in the worst dives of the city, and
eventually gained their good opinion to the extent of being allowed to
assist in planning a burglary.  But before the actual robbery took
place, Richard had obtained enough evidence against his crook
companions to turn them over to the police and eventually land them in
prison.  It was during these days that he wrote his first story for a
magazine, and the following letter shows that it was something of a
milestone in his career.

PHILADELPHIA.

August, 1888.

DEAR FAMILY:

The St. Nicholas people sent me a check for $50 for the "pirate" story.
It would be insupportable affectation to say that I was not delighted.
Jennings Crute and I were waiting for breakfast when I found the
letter.  I opened it very slowly, for I feared they would bluff me with
some letter about illustrations or revision, or offering me a reduced
subscription to the magazine.  There was a letter inside and a check.
I read the letter before I looked at the check, which I supposed would
be for $30, as the other story was valued at $20.  The note said that a
perfect gentleman named Chichester would be pleased if I would find
enclosed a check for $50.  I looked at Jenny helplessly, and said,
"It's for fifty, Jenny."  Crute had an insane look in his eyes as he
murmured "half a hundred dollars, and on your day off, too."  Then I
sat down suddenly and wondered what I would buy first, and Crute sat in
a dazed condition, and abstractedly took a handful of segars out of the
box dear old Dad gave me.  As I didn't say anything, he took another
handful, and then sat down and gazed at the check for five minutes in
awe.  After breakfast I calculated how much I would have after I paid
my debts.  I still owe say $23, and I have some shoes to pay for and my
hair to cut.  I had a wild idea of going over to New York and buying
some stocks, but I guess I'll go to Bond's and Baker's instead.

I'm going down street now to see if Drexel wants to borrow any ready
money-on the way down I will make purchases and pay bills so that my
march will be a triumphal procession.

I got a story on the front page this morning about an explosion at
Columbia Avenue Station--I went out on it with another man my senior in
years and experience, whom Watrous expected to write the story while I
hustled for facts.  When we got back I had all the facts, and what
little he had was incorrect--so I said I would dispense with his
services and write the story myself.  I did it very politely, but it
queered the man before the men, and Watrous grew very sarcastic at his
expense.  Next time Andy will know better and let me get my own stories
alone.

Your Millionaire Son,

DICK.

I'm still the "same old Dick"; not proud a bit.


This was my mother's reply:


Thursday.

August 1888.

DEAR DICK:

Your letter has just come and we are all delighted.  Well done for old
St. Nicholas!  I thought they meant to wait till the story was
published.  It took me back to the day when I got $50. for "Life in the
Iron Mills."  I carried the letter half a day before opening it, being
so sure that it was a refusal.

I had a great mind to read the letter to Davis and Cecile who were on
the porch but was afraid you would not like it.

I did read them an extremely impertinent enclosure which was so like
the letter I sent yesterday.  That I think you got it before writing
this.

. . .  Well I am glad about that cheque!  Have you done anything on
Gallagher?  That is by far the best work you've done--oh, by far--Send
that to Gilder.  In old times The Century would not print the word
"brandy."  But those days are over.

Two more days--dear boy--

MOTHER.


In addition to his work on The Press, Richard also found time to assist
his friend, Morton McMichael, 3d, in the editing of a weekly
publication called The Stage.  In fact with the exception of the
services of an office boy, McMichael and Richard were The Stage.
Between them they wrote the editorials, criticisms, the London and
Paris special correspondence, solicited the advertisements, and
frequently assisted in the wrapping and mailing of the copies sent to
their extremely limited list of subscribers.  During this time,
however, Richard was establishing himself as a star reporter on The
Press, and was already known as a clever news-gatherer and interviewer.
It was in reply to a letter that Richard wrote to Robert Louis
Stevenson enclosing an interview he had had with Walt Whitman, that
Stevenson wrote the following letter--which my brother always regarded
as one of his greatest treasures:


Why, thank you so much for your frank, agreeable and natural letter.
It is certainly very pleasant that all you young fellows should enjoy
my work and get some good out of it and it was very kind in you to
write and tell me so.  The tale of the suicide is excellently droll,
and your letter, you may be sure, will be preserved.  If you are to
escape unhurt out of your present business you must be very careful,
and you must find in your heart much constancy.  The swiftly done work
of the journalist and the cheap finish and ready made methods to which
it leads, you must try to counteract in private by writing with the
most considerate slowness and on the most ambitious models.  And when I
say "writing"--O, believe me, it is rewriting that I have chiefly in
mind.  If you will do this I hope to hear of you some day.

Please excuse this sermon from

Your obliged

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


In the spring of 1889 Richard as the correspondent of the Philadelphia
Telegraph, accompanied a team of Philadelphia cricketers on a tour of
Ireland and England, but as it was necessary for him to spend most of
his time reporting the matches played in small university towns, he saw
only enough of London to give him a great longing to return as soon as
the chance offered.  Late that summer he resumed his work on The Press,
but Richard was not at all satisfied with his journalistic progress,
and for long his eyes had been turned toward New York.  There he knew
that there was not only a broader field for such talent as he might
possess, but that the chance for adventure was much greater, and it was
this hope and love of adventure that kept Richard moving on all of his
life.

On a morning late in September, 1889, he started for New York to look
for a position as reporter on one of the metropolitan newspapers.  I do
not know whether he carried with him any letters or that he had any
acquaintances in the journalistic world on whose influence he counted,
but, in any case, he visited a number of offices without any success
whatever.  Indeed, he had given up the day as wasted, and was on his
way to take the train back to Philadelphia.  Tired and discouraged, he
sat down on a bench in City Hall Park, and mentally shook his fist at
the newspaper offices on Park Row that had given him so cold a
reception.  At this all-important moment along came Arthur Brisbane,
whom Richard had met in London when the former was the English
correspondent of The Sun.  Brisbane had recently been appointed editor
of The Evening Sun, and had already met with a rather spectacular
success.  On hearing the object of Richard's visit to New York, he
promptly offered him a position on his staff and Richard as promptly
accepted.  I remember that the joyous telegram he sent to my mother,
telling of his success, and demanding that the fatted calf be killed
for dinner that night was not received with unalloyed happiness.  To my
mother and father it meant that their first-born was leaving home to
seek his fortune, and that without Richard's love and sympathy the home
could never be quite the same.  But the fatted calf was killed, every
one pretended to be just as elated as Richard was over his good
fortune, and in two days he left us for his first adventure.

The following note to his mother Richard scribbled off in pencil at the
railway-station on his way to New York:


I am not surprised that you were sad if you thought I was going away
for good.  I could not think of it myself.  I am only going to make a
little reputation and to learn enough of the business to enable me to
live at home in the centre of the universe with you.  That is truth.
God bless you.

DICK.




CHAPTER IV

NEW YORK

Of the many completely happy periods of Richard's life there were few
more joyous than the first years he spent as a reporter in New York.
For the first time he was completely his own master and paying his own
way--a condition which afforded him infinite satisfaction.  He was
greatly attached to Brisbane and as devoted to the interests of The
Evening Sun as if he had been the editor and publisher.  In return
Brisbane gave him a free rein and allowed him to write very much what
and as he chose.  The two men were constantly together, in and out of
office hours, and planned many of the leading features of the paper
which on account of the brilliancy of its news stories and special
articles was at that time attracting an extraordinary amount of
attention.  Richard divided his working hours between reporting
important news events, writing specials (principally about theatrical
people), and the Van Bibber stories, nearly all of which were published
for the first time in The Evening Sun.  These short tales of New York
life soon made a distinct hit, and, while they appeared anonymously, it
was generally known that Richard was their author.  In addition to his
newspaper work my brother was also working on short stories for the
magazines, and in 1890 scored his first real success in this field,
with "Gallegher," which appeared in Scribner's.  This was shortly
followed by "The Other Woman,"  "Miss Catherwaite's Understudy,"  "A
Walk up the Avenue,"  "My Disreputable Friend, Mr. Raegen,"  "An
Unfinished Story," and other stories that soon gave him an established
reputation as a writer of fiction.  But while Richard's success was
attained in a remarkably short space of time and at an extremely early
age, it was not accomplished without an enormous amount of hard work
and considerable privation.  When he first went to New York his salary
was but thirty dollars a week, and while he remained on The Evening Sun
never over fifty dollars, and the prices he received for his first
short stories were extremely meagre.  During the early days on The
Evening Sun he had a room in a little house at 108 Waverly Place, and
took his meals in the neighborhood where he happened to find himself
and where they were cheapest.  He usually spent his week-ends in
Philadelphia, but his greatest pleasure was when he could induce some
member of his family to visit him in New York.  I fear I was the one
who most often accepted his hospitality, and wonderful visits they
were, certainly to me, and I think to Richard as well.  The great event
was our Saturday-night dinner, when we always went to a little
restaurant on Sixth Avenue.  I do not imagine the fifty-cent table
d'hote (vin compris) the genial Mr. Jauss served us was any better than
most fifty-cent table-d'hote dinners, but the place was quaint and
redolent of strange smells of cooking as well as of a true bohemian
atmosphere.  Those were the days when the Broadway Theatre was given
over to the comic operas in which Francis Wilson and De Wolfe Hopper
were the stars, and as both of the comedians were firm friends of
Richard, we invariably ended our evening at the Broadway.  Sometimes we
occupied a box as the guests of the management, and at other times we
went behind the scenes and sat in the star's dressing-room.  I think I
liked it best when Hopper was playing, because during Wilson's regime
the big dressing-room was a rather solemn sort of place, but when
Hopper ruled, the room was filled with pretty girls and he treated us
to fine cigars and champagne.

Halcyon nights those, and then on Sunday morning we always breakfasted
at old Martin's on University Place eggs a la Martin and that wonderful
coffee and pain de menage.  And what a wrench it was when I tore myself
away from the delights of the great city and scurried back to my desk
in sleepy Philadelphia.  Had I been a prince royal Richard could not
have planned more carefully than he did for these visits, and to meet
the expense was no easy matter for him.  Indeed, I know that to pay for
all our gayeties he usually had to carry his guitar to a neighboring
pawn-broker where the instrument was always good for an eight-dollar
loan.  But from the time Richard first began to make his own living one
of the great pleasures of his life was to celebrate, or as he called
it, to "have a party."  Whenever he had finished a short story he had a
party, and when the story had been accepted there was another party,
and, of course, the real party was when he received the check.  And so
it was throughout his life, giving a party to some one whom a party
would help, buying a picture for which he had no use to help a
struggling artist, sending a few tons of coal to an old lady who was
not quite warm enough, always writing a letter or a check for some one
of his own craft who had been less fortunate than he--giving to every
beggar that he met, fearing that among all the thousand fakers he might
refuse one worthy case.  I think this habit of giving Richard must have
inherited from his father, who gave out of all proportion to his means,
and with never too close a scrutiny to the worthiness of the cause.
Both men were too intensely human to do that, but if this great desire
on the part of my father and brother to help others gave the recipients
pleasure I'm sure that it caused in the hearts of the givers an even
greater happiness.  The following letters were chosen from a great
number which Richard wrote to his family, telling of his first days on
The Evening Sun, and of his life in New York.


YORK Evening Sun--1890

DEAR MOTHER:

Today is as lovely and fresh as the morning, a real spring day, and I
feel good in consequence.  I have just come from a couple of raids,
where we had a very lively time, and some of them had to pull their
guns.  I found it necessary to punch a few sports myself.  The old
sergeant from headquarters treats me like a son and takes the greatest
pride in whatever I do or write.  He regularly assigns me now to
certain doors, and I always obey orders like the little gentleman that
I am.  Instead of making me unpopular, I find it helps me with the
sports, though it hurts my chances professionally, as so many of them
know me now that I am no use in some districts.  For instance, in Mott
and Pell streets, or in the Bowery, I am as safe as any precinct
detective.  I tell you this to keep you from worrying.  They won't
touch a man whom they think is an agent or an officer.  Only it spoils
my chances of doing reportorial-detective work.  For instance, the
captain of the Bowery district refused me a detective the other morning
to take the Shippens around the Chinese and the tougher quarters
because he said they were as safe with me as with any of the other men
whose faces are as well known.  To-night I am going to take a party to
the headquarters of the fire department, where I have a cinch on the
captain, a very nice fellow, who is unusually grateful for something I
wrote about him and his men.  They are going to do the Still Alarm act
for me.

These clippings all came out in to-day's paper.  The ladies in the
Tombs were the Shippens, of course; and Mamie Blake is a real girl, and
the story is true from start to finish.  I think it is a pathetic
little history.

Give my love to all.  I will bring on the story I have finished and get
you to make some suggestions.  It is quite short.  Since Scribner's
have been so civil, I think I will give them a chance at the great
prize.  I am writing a comic guide book and a history of the Haymarket
for the paper; both are rich in opportunities.  This weather makes me
feel like another person.  I will be so glad to get home.  With lots of
love and kisses for you and Nora.

DICK-O.


NEW YORK--1890.

DEAR CHAS:

Brisbane has suggested to me that the Bradley story would lead anyone
to suppose that my evenings were spent in the boudoirs of the
horizontales of 34th Street and has scared me somewhat in consequence.
If it strikes you and Dad the same way don't show it to Mother.  Dad
made one mistake by thinking I wrote a gambling story which has made me
nervous.  It is hardly the fair thing to suppose that a man must have
an intimate acquaintance with whatever he writes of intimately.  A lot
of hunting people, for instance, would not believe that I had written
the "Traver's Only Ride" story because they knew I did not hunt.  Don't
either you or Dad make any mistake about this.

DICK.

As a matter of fact they would not let me in the room, and I don't know
whether it abounded in signed etchings or Bougereau's nymphs.


NEW YORK--1890.

DEAR FAMILY:

Today has been more or less feverish.  In the morning's mail I received
a letter from Berlin asking permission to translate "Gallegher" into
German, and a proof of a paragraph from The Critic on my burlesque of
Rudyard Kipling, which was meant to please but which bored me.  Then
the "Raegen" story came in, making nine pages of the Scribner's, which
at ten dollars a page ought to be $90.  Pretty good pay for three
weeks' work, and it is a good story.  Then at twelve a young man came
bustling into the office, stuck his card down on the desk and said, "I
am S. S. McClure.  I have sent my London representative to Berlin and
my New York man to London.  Will you take charge of my New York end?"

If he thought to rattle me he was very much out of it, for I said in
his same tone and manner, "Bring your New York representative back and
send me to London, and I'll consider it.  As long as I am in New York I
will not leave The Evening Sun."

"Edmund Gosse is my London representative," he said; "you can have the
same work here.  Come out and take lunch." I said, "Thank you, I can't;
I'll see you on Tuesday."

"All right," he said.  "I'll come for you.  Think of what I say.  I'll
make your fortune.  Bradford Merrill told me to get you.  You won't
have anything to do but ask people to write novels and edit them.  I'll
send you abroad later if you don't like New York.  Can you write any
children's stories for me?"

"No," I said, "see you Tuesday."

This is a verbal report of all and everything that was said.  I
consider it a curious interview.  It will raise my salary here or I go.
What do YOU think?  DICK.



NEW YORK--1890.

DEAR FAMILY:

The more I thought of the McClure offer the less I thought of it.  So I
told him last night I was satisfied where I was, and that the $75 he
offered me was no inducement.  Brisbane says I will get $50 about the
first of October, which is plenty and enough for a young man who
intends to be good to his folks.  I cannot do better than stay where I
am, for it is understood between Brisbane and Laffan that in the event
of the former's going into politics I shall take his place, which will
suit very well until something better turns up.  Then there is the
chance of White's coming back and my going to Lunnon, which would
please me now more for what I think I could make of it than what I
think others have made of it.  If I had gone to McClure I would have
been shelved and side-tracked, and I am still in the running, and
learning every day.  Brisbane and I have had our first serious
difficulty over Mrs. R----, who is staying with Mrs. "Bill."  There is
at present the most desperate rivalry, and we discuss each other's
chances with great anger.  He counts on his transcontinental knowledge,
but my short stories hit very hard, and he is not in it when I sing
"Thy Face Will Lead Me On" and "When Kerrigan Struck High C."  She has
a fatal fondness for Sullivan, which is most unfortunate, as Brisbane
can and does tell her about him by the half hour.  Yesterday we both
tried to impress her by riding down in front of the porch and showing
off the horses and ourselves.  Brisbane came off best, though I came
off quickest, for my horse put his foot in a hole and went down on his
knees, while I went over his head like the White Knight in "Alice."  I
would think nothing of sliding off a roof now.  But I made up for this
mishap by coming back in my grey suit and having it compared with the
picture in The Century.  It is a very close fight, and, while Brisbane
is chasing over town for photographs of Sullivan, I am buying books of
verses of which she seems to be fond.  As soon as she gets her divorce
one of us is going to marry her.  We don't know which.  She is about as
beautiful a woman as I ever saw, and very witty and well-informed, but
it would cost a good deal to keep her in diamonds.  She wears some the
Queen gave her, but she wants more.

DICK.


NEW YORK--1890.

DEAR MOTHER (LATE MA):

I am well and with lots to do.  I went up to see Hopper the other
night, which was the first time in three months that I have been back
of a theater, and it was like going home.  There is a smell about the
painty and gassy and dusty place that I love as much as fresh earth and
newly cut hay, and the girls look so pretty and bold lying around on
the sets, and the men so out of focus and with such startling cheeks
and lips.  They were very glad to see me and made a great fuss.  Then
I've been to see Carmencita dance, which I enjoyed remarkably, and I
have been reading Rudyard Kipling's short stories, and I think it is
disgusting that a boy like that should write such stories.  He hasn't
left himself anything to do when he gets old.  He reminds me of Bret
Harte and not a bit of Stevenson, to whom some of them compare him.

I am very glad you liked the lady in mid-air story so much, but it
wasn't a bit necessary to add the MORAL from a MOTHER.  I saw it coming
up before I had read two lines; and a very good moral it is, too, with
which I agree heartily.  But, of course, you know it is not a new idea
to me.  Anything as good and true as that moral cannot be new at this
late date.  I went to the Brooklyn Handicap race yesterday.  It is one
of the three biggest races of the year, and a man stood in front of me
in the paddock in a white hat.  Another man asked him what he was
"playing."

"Well," he said, "I fancy Fides myself."

"Fides!" said his friend, "why, she ain't in it.  She won't see home.
Raceland's the horse for your money; she's favorite, and there isn't
any second choice.  But Fides!  Why, she's simply impossible.  Raceland
beat HER last Suburban."

"Yes, I remember," said the man in the white hat, "but I fancy Fides."

Then another chap said to him, "Fides is all good enough on a dust
track on a sunny, pleasant day, but she can't ran in the mud.  She
hasn't got the staying powers.  She's a pretty one to look at, but
she's just a 'grandstand' ladies' choice.  She ain't in it with
Raceland or Erica.  The horse YOU want is not a pretty, dainty flyer,
but a stayer, that is sure and that brings in good money, not big odds,
but good money.  Why, I can name you a dozen better'n Fides."

"Still, somehow, I like Fides best," said the obstinate man in the
white hat.

"But Fides will take the bit in her mouth and run away, or throw the
jock or break into the fence.  She isn't steady.  She's all right to
have a little bet on, just enough for a flyer, but she's not the horse
to plunge on.  If you're a millionaire with money to throw away, why,
you might put some of it up on her, but, as it is, you want to put your
money where it will be sure of a 'place,' anyway.  Now, let me mark
your card for you?"

"No," said the man, "what you all say is reasonable, I see that; but,
somehow, I rather fancy Fides best."

I've forgotten now whether Fides won or not, and whether she landed the
man who just fancied her without knowing why a winner or sent him home
broke.  But, in any event, that is quite immaterial, the story simply
shows how obstinate some men are as regards horses and--other uncertain
critters.  I have no doubt but that the Methodist minister's daughter
would have made Hiram happy if he had loved her, but he didn't.  No
doubt Anne ----, Nan ----, Katy ---- and Maude ---- would have made me
happy if they would have consented to have me and I had happened to
love them, but I fancied Fides.

But now since I have scared you sufficiently, let me add for your peace
of mind that I've not enough money to back any horses just at present,
and before I put any money up on any one of them for the Matrimonial
stakes, I will ask you first to look over the card and give me a few
pointers.  I mayn't follow them, you know, but I'll give you a fair
warning, at any rate.

"You're my sweetheart, I'm your beau."

DICK.


NEW YORK, May 29, 1890.

This is just a little good night note to say how I wish I was with you
down at that dear old place and how much I love you and Nora who is
getting lovelier and sweeter and prettier everyday and I know a pretty
girl when I see 'em, Fides, for instance.  But I won't tease you about
that any more.

I finished a short silly story to night which I am in doubt whether to
send off or not.  I think I will keep it until I read it to you and
learn what you think.

Mr. Gilder has asked me to stay with them at Marion, and to go to
Cambridge with Mrs. Gilder and dear Mrs. Cleveland and Grover
Cleveland, when he reads the poem before D. K. E.

I have bought a book on decorations, colored, and I am choosing what I
want, like a boy with a new pair of boots.

Good-night, my dearest Mama.

DICK.


In addition to his regular work on The Evening Sun, my brother, as I
have already said, was devoting a great part, of his leisure moments to
the writing of short stories, and had made a tentative agreement with a
well-known magazine to do a series of short sketches of New York types.
Evidently fearful that Richard was writing too much and with a view to
pecuniary gain, my mother wrote the following note of warning:


PHILADELPHIA, 1890.

DEAR DICK:

I wouldn't undertake the "types."  For one thing, you will lose
prestige writing for ----'s paper.  For another, I dread beyond
everything your beginning to do hack work for money.  It is the
beginning of decadence both in work and reputation for you.  I know by
my own and a thousand other people.  Begin to write because it "is a
lot of money" and you stop doing your best work.  You make your work
common and your prices will soon go down.  George Lewes managed George
Eliot wisely.

He stopped her hack work.  Kept her at writing novels and soon one each
year brought her $40,000.  I am taking a purely mercenary view of the
thing.  There is another which you understand better than I-- Mind your
Mother's advice to you--now and all the time is "do only your best
work--even if you starve doing it."  But you won't starve.  You'll get
your dinner at Martin's instead of Delmonico's, which won't hurt you in
the long run.  Anyhow, $1000. for 12,500 words is not a great price.

That was a fine tea you gave.  I should like to have heard the good
talk.  It was like the regiment of brigadier generals with no privates.

Your

MOTHER.


This is a letter written by my father after the publication of
Richard's story "A Walk up the Avenue."  Richard frequently spoke of
his father as his "kindest and severest critic."


PHILADELPHIA, July 22nd, 1890.

10.30 P. M.

MY DEAR Boy:

You can do it; you have done it; it is all right.  I have read A Walk
up the Avenue.  It is far and away the best thing you have ever
done--Full of fine subtle thought, of rare, manly feeling.

I am not afraid of Dick the author.  He's all right.  I shall only be
afraid--when I am afraid--that Dick the man will not live up to the
other fellow, that he may forget how much the good Lord has given him,
and how responsible to the good Lord and to himself he is and will be
for it.  A man entrusted with such talent should carry himself
straighter than others to whom it is denied.  He has great duties to
do; he owes tribute to the giver.

Don't let the world's temptations in any of its forms come between you
and your work.  Make your life worthy of your talent, and humbly by day
and by night ask God to help you to do it.

I am very proud of this work.  It is good work, with brain, bone,
nerve, muscle in it.  It is human, with healthy pulse and heartsome
glow in it.  Remember, hereafter, you have by it put on the bars
against yourself preventing you doing any work less good.  You have
yourself made your record, you can't lower it.  You can only beat it.

Lovingly, DAD.


In the latter part of December, 1890, Richard left The Evening Sun to
become the managing editor of Harper's Weekly.  George William Curtis
was then its editor, and at this time no periodical had a broader or
greater influence for the welfare of the country.  As Richard was then
but twenty-six, his appointment to his new editorial duties came as a
distinct honor.  The two years that Richard had spent on The Evening
Sun had been probably the happiest he had ever known.  He really loved
New York, and at this time Paris and London held no such place in his
affections as they did in later years.  And indeed there was small
reason why these should not have been happy years for any young man.
At twenty-six Richard had already accomplished much, and his name had
become a familiar one not only to New Yorkers but throughout the
country.  Youth and health he had, and many friends, and a talent that
promised to carry him far in the profession he loved.  His new position
paid him a salary considerably larger than he had received heretofore,
and he now demanded and received much higher terms for his stories.
All of which was well for Richard because as his income grew so grew
his tastes.  I have known few men who cared less for money than did my
brother, and I have known few who cared more for what it could buy for
his friends and for himself.  Money to him, and, during his life he
made very large sums of it, he always chose to regard as income but
never capital.  A bond or a share of stock meant to him what it would
bring that day on the Stock Exchange.  The rainy day which is the
bugaboo for the most of us, never seemed to show on his horizon.  For a
man whose livelihood depended on the lasting quality of his creative
faculties he had an infinite faith in the future, and indeed his own
experience seemed to show that he was justified in this belief.  It
could not have been very long after his start as a fiction writer that
he received as high a price for his work as any of his contemporaries;
and just previous to his death, more than twenty years later, he signed
a contract to write six stories at a figure which, so far as I know,
was the highest ever offered an American author.  In any case, money or
the lack of it certainly never caused Richard any worriment during the
early days of which I write.  For what he made he worked extremely
hard, but the reputation and the spending of the money that this same
hard work brought him caused him infinite happiness.  He enjoyed the
reputation he had won and the friends that such a reputation helped him
to make; he enjoyed entertaining and being entertained, and he enjoyed
pretty much all of the good things of life.  And all of this he enjoyed
with the naive, almost boyish enthusiasm that only one could to whom it
had all been made possible at twenty-six.  Of these happy days Booth
Tarkington wrote at the time of my brother's death:

"To the college boy of the early nineties Richard Harding Davis was the
'beau ideal of jeunesse doree,' a sophisticated heart of gold.  He was
of that college boy's own age, but already an editor--already
publishing books!  His stalwart good looks were as familiar to us as
were those of our own football captain; we knew his face as we knew the
face of the President of the United States, but we infinitely preferred
Davis's.  When the Waldorf was wondrously completed, and we cut an
exam. in Cuneiform Inscriptions for an excursion to see the world at
lunch in its new magnificence, and Richard Harding Davis came into the
Palm Room--then, oh, then, our day was radiant!  That was the top of
our fortune; we could never have hoped for so much.  Of all the great
people of every continent, this was the one we most desired to see."

Richard's intimate friends of these days were Charles Dana Gibson, who
illustrated a number of my brother's stories, Robert Howard Russell,
Albert La Montagne, Helen Benedict, now Mrs. Thomas Hastings, Ethel
Barrymore, Maude Adams, E. H.  Sothern, his brother,  Sam, and Arthur
Brisbane.  None of this little circle was married at the time, its
various members were seldom apart, and they extracted an enormous
amount of fun out of life.  I had recently settled in New York, and we
had rooms at 10 East Twenty-eighth Street, where we lived very
comfortably for many years.  Indeed Richard did not leave them until
his marriage in the summer of 1899.  They were very pleasant, sunny
rooms, and in the sitting-room, which Richard had made quite
attractive, we gave many teas and supper-parties.  But of all the happy
incidents I can recall at the Twenty-eighth Street house, the one I
remember most distinctly took place in the hallway the night that
Richard received the first statement and check for his first book of
short stories, and before the money had begun to come in as fast as it
did afterward.  We were on our way to dinner at some modest resort when
we saw and at once recognized the long envelope on the mantel.  Richard
guessed it would be for one hundred and ninety dollars, but with a
rather doubting heart I raised my guess to three hundred.  And when,
with trembling fingers, Richard had finally torn open the envelope and
found a check for nine hundred and odd dollars, what a wild dance we
did about the hall-table, and what a dinner we had that night!  Not at
the modest restaurant as originally intended, but at Delmonico's! It
was during these days that Seymour Hicks and his lovely wife Ellaline
Terriss first visited America, and they and Richard formed a mutual
attachment that lasted until his death.

Richard had always taken an intense interest in the drama, and at the
time he was managing editor of Harper's Weekly had made his first
efforts as a playwright.  Robert Hilliard did a one-act version of
Richard's short story, "Her First Appearance," which under the title of
"The Littlest Girl" he played in vaudeville for many years.  E. H.
Sothern and Richard had many schemes for writing a play together, but
the only actual result they ever attained was a one-act version Sothern
did at the old Lyceum of my brother's story, "The Disreputable Mr.
Raegen."  It was an extremely tense and absorbing drama, and Sothern
was very fine in the part of Raegen, but for the forty-five minutes the
playlet lasted Sothern had to hold the stage continuously alone, and as
it preceded a play of the regulation length, the effort proved too much
for the actor's strength, and after a few performances it was taken
off.  Although it was several years after this that my brother's first
long play was produced he never lost interest in the craft of
playwriting, and only waited for the time and means to really devote
himself to it.



BOSTON, January 22nd, 1891.

DEAR FAMILY:--

This is just to say that I am alive and sleepy, and that my head is
still its normal size, although I have at last found one man in Boston
who has read one of my stories, and that was Barrymore from New York.
The Fairchilds' dinner was a tremendous affair, and I was conquered
absolutely by Mr. Howells, who went far, far out of his way to be as
kind and charming as an old man could be.  Yesterday Mrs. Whitman gave
a tea in her studio.  I thought she meant to have a half dozen young
people to drink a cup with her, and I sauntered in in the most
nonchalant manner to find that about everybody had been asked to meet
me.  And everybody came, principally owing to the "Harding Davis" part
of the name for they all spoke of mother and so very dearly that it
made me pretty near weep.  Everybody came from old Dr. Holmes who never
goes any place, to Mrs. "Jack" Gardner and all the debutantes.  "I was
on in that scene."  In the evening I went with the Fairchilds to Mrs.
Julia Ward Howe's to meet the S----s but made a point not to as he was
talking like a cad when I heard him and Mrs. Fairchild and I agreed to
be the only people in Boston who had not clasped his hand.  There were
only a few people present and Mrs. Howe recited the Battle Hymn of the
Republic, which I thought very characteristic of the city.  To-day I
posed again and Cumnock took me over Cambridge and into all of the
Clubs where I met some very nice boys and felt very old.  Then we went
to a tea Cushing gave in his rooms and to night I go to Mrs. Deland's.
But the mornings with the Fairchilds are the best.  DICK.


In the spring of 1891 my mother and sister, Nora, went abroad for the
summer, and the following note was written to Richard just before my
mother sailed:

DEAR DICK:

This is just to give my dearest love to you my darling.  Some day at
sea when I cannot hear you nor see you, whenever it is that you get
it--night or morning---you may be sure that we are all loving and
thinking of you.

Keep close to the Lord.  Your Lord who never has refused to hear a
prayer of yours.

Just think that I have kissed you a thousand times.

MOTHER.



FRANKLIN SQUARE, NEW YORK.

June, 1891.

DEAR MOTHER:

Your letters are a great delight to me but I think you are going
entirely too quickly.  You do not feel it now but you are simply
hurrying through the courses of your long dinner so rapidly that when
dessert comes you will not be up to it.  A day or two's rest and less
greed to see many things would be much more fun I should think, and you
will enjoy those days more to look back to when you wandered around
some little town by yourselves and made discoveries than those you
spent doing what you feel you ought to do.  Excuse this lecture but I
know that when I got to Paris I wanted to do nothing but sit still and
read and let "sights" go-- You will soon learn not to duplicate and
that one cathedral will answer for a dozen.  And I am disappointed in
your mad desire to get to Edinboro to get letters from home, as though
you couldn't get letters from me every day of your life and as if there
were not enough of you together to keep from getting homesick.  I am
ashamed of you.  But that is all the scolding I have to do for I do not
know what has given me more pleasure than your letters and Nora's
especially.  They tell me the best news in the world and that is, that
you are all getting as much happiness out of it as I have prayed you
would.  I may go over in September myself.  But I would only go to
London.  Now, then for Home news.  I have sold the "Reporter Who Made
Himself King" to McClure's for $300. to be published in the syndicate
in August.  I have finished "Her First Appearance" and Gibson is doing
the illustrations, three.  I got $175. for it.

I am now at work on a story about Arthur Cumnock, Harvard's football
captain who was the hero of Class Day.  It will come out this week and
will match Lieut. Grant's chance.  In July I begin a story called the
"Traveller's Tale" which will be used in the November Harper.  That is
all _I_ am doing.

So far the notices of "Gallegher" have been very good, I mean the
English ones.

I went up to Class Day on Friday and spent the day with Miss Fairchild
and Miss Howells and with Mr. H. for chaperone.  He is getting old and
says he never deserved the fuss they made over him.  We had a pretty
perfect day although it threatened rain most of the time.  We wandered
around from one spread to another meeting beautifully dressed girls
everywhere and "lions" and celebrities.  Then the fight for the roses
around the tree was very interesting and picturesque and arena like and
the best of all was sitting in the broad window seats of the
dormitories with a Girl or two, generally "a" girl and listening to the
glee club sing and watching the lanterns and the crowds of people as
beautiful as Redfern could make them.

Half of Seabright was burnt down last week but not my half, although
the fire destroyed all the stores and fishermen's houses and stopped
only one house away from Pannachi's, where I will put up.  I am very
well and content and look forward to much pleasure this summer at
Seabright and much work.  I find I have seldom been so happy as when
working hard and fast as I have been forced to do these last two weeks
and so I will keep it up.  Not in such a way as to hurt me but just
enough to keep me happy.  DICK.


NEW YORK, August 1891.  From The Pall Mall Budget Gazette.

"The Americans are saying, by the way, that they have discovered a
Rudyard Kipling of their own.  This is Mr. Richard Harding Davis, a
volume of whose stories has been published this week by Mr. Osgood.
Mr. Davis is only twenty-six, was for sometime on the staff of the New
York Evening Sun.  He is now the editor of Harper's Weekly."

That is me.  I have also a mother and sister who once went to London
and what do you think they first went to see, in London, mind you.
They got into a four wheeler and they said "cabby drive as fast as you
can," not knowing that four wheelers never go faster than a dead
march--" to-- "where do you think? St. Paul's, the Temple, the Abbey,
their lodgings, the Houses of Parliament--the Pavilion Music Hall--the
Tower--no to none of these--"To the Post Office."  That is what my
mother and sister did!  After this when they hint that they would like
to go again and say "these muffins are not English muffins" and "do you
remember the little Inn at Chester, ah, those were happy days," I will
say, "And do you remember the Post Office in Edinburgh and London.  We
have none such in America."  And as they only go abroad to get letters
they will hereafter go to Rittenhouse Square and I will write letters
to them from London.  All this shows that a simple hurriedly written
letter from Richard Harding Davis is of more value than all the show
places of London.  It makes me quite PROUD.  And so does this:

"'Gallegher' is as good as anything of Bret Harte's, although it is in
Mr. Davis's own vein, not in the borrowed vein of Bret Harte or anybody
else.  'The Cynical Miss Catherwaight' is very good, too, and 'Mr.
Raegen' is still better."

But on the other hand, it makes me tired, and so does this:

"'The Other Woman' is a story which offends good taste in more than one
way.  It is a blunder to have written it, a greater blunder to have
published it, and a greater blunder STILL to have republished it."

I suppose now that Dad has crossed with Prince George and Nora has seen
the Emperor, that you will be proud too.  But you will be prouder of
your darling boy Charles, even though he does get wiped out at
Seabright next week and you will be even prouder when he writes great
stories for The Evening Sun.

RICHARD.


The Players,

16 Gramercy Park.

24th, 1891.

DEAR FAMILY:

I had a great day at the game and going there and coming back.  I met a
great many old football men and almost all of them spoke of the "Out of
the Game" story.  Cumnock, Camp, Poe, Terry and lots more whose names
mean nothing to you, so ignorant are you, were there and we had long
talks.  I went to see Cleveland yesterday about a thing of which I have
thought much and talked less and that was going into politics in this
country.  To say he discouraged me in so doing would be saying the rain
is wet.  He seemed to think breaking stones as a means of getting fame
and fortune was quicker and more genteel.  I also saw her and the BABY.
She explained why she had not written you and also incidentally why she
HAD written Childs.  I do not know as what Cleveland said made much
impression upon me--although I found out what I could expect from
him--that is nothing here but apparently a place abroad if I wanted it.
But he thought Congress was perfectly feasible but the greatest folly
to go there.

DICK.




CHAPTER V

FIRST TRAVEL ARTICLES

For Richard these first years in New York were filled to overflowing
with many varied interests, quite enough to satisfy most young men of
twenty-seven.  He had come and seen and to a degree, so far as the
limitation of his work would permit, had conquered New York, but
Richard thoroughly realized that New York was not only a very small
part of the world but of his own country, and that to write about his
own people and his own country and other people and other lands he must
start his travels at an early age, and go on travelling until the end.
And for the twenty-five years that followed that was what Richard did.
Even when he was not on his travels but working on a novel or a play at
Marion or later on at Mount Kisco, so far as it was possible he kept in
touch with events that were happening and the friends that he had made
all over the globe.  He subscribed to most of the English and French
illustrated periodicals and to one London daily newspaper which every
day he read with the same interest that he read half a dozen New York
newspapers and the interest was always that of the trained editor at
work.  Richard was not only physically restless but his mind
practically never relaxed.  When others, tired after a hard day's work
or play, would devote the evening to cards or billiards or chatter,
Richard would write letters or pore over some strange foreign magazine,
consult maps, make notes, or read the stories of his contemporaries.
He practically read every American magazine from cover to
cover--advertisements were a delight to him, and the finding of a new
writer gave him as much pleasure as if he had been the fiction editor
who had accepted the first story by the embryo genius.  The official
organs of our army and navy he found of particular interest.  Not only
did he thus follow the movements of his friends in these branches of
the service but if he read of a case wherein he thought a sailor or a
soldier had been done an injustice he would promptly take the matter up
with the authorities at Washington, and the results he obtained were
often not only extremely gratifying to the wronged party but caused
Richard no end of pleasure.

According to my brother's arrangement with the Harpers, he was to
devote a certain number of months of every year to the editing of The
Weekly, and the remainder to travel and the writing of his experiences
for Harper's Monthly.  He started on the first of these trips in
January, 1892, and the result was a series of articles which afterward
appeared under the title of "The West from a Car Window."



January, 1892.  (Some place in Texas)

I left St. Louis last night, Wednesday, and went to bed and slept for
twelve hours.  To-day has been most trying and I shall be very glad to
get on dry land again.  The snow has ceased although the papers say
this is the coldest snap they have had in San Antonio in ten years.  It
might have waited a month for me I think.  It has been a most dreary
trip from a car window point of view.  Now that the snow has gone,
there is mud and ice and pine trees and colored people, but no cowboys
as yet.  They talk nothing but Chili and war and they make such funny
mistakes.  We have a G. A. R. excursion on the train, consisting of one
fat and prosperous G. A. R., the rest of the excursion having backed
out on account of Garza who the salient warriors imagine as a roaring
lion seeking whom he may devour.  One old chap with white hair came on
board at a desolate station and asked for "the boys in blue" and was
very much disgusted when he found that "that grasshopper Garza" had
scared them away-- He had tramped five miles through the mud to greet a
possible comrade and was much chagrined.  The excursion shook hands
with him and they took a drink together.  The excursion tells me he is
a glass manufacturer, an owner of a slate quarry and the best embalmer
of bodies in the country.  He says he can keep them four years and does
so "for specimens" those that are left on his hands and others he
purchases from the morgue.  He has a son who is an actor and he fills
me full of the most harrowing tales of Indian warfare and the details
of the undertaking business.  He is SO funny about the latter that I
weep with laughter and he cannot see why-- Joe Jefferson and I went to
a matinee on Wednesday and saw Robson in "She stoops to Conquer."  The
house was absolutely packed and when Joe came in the box they yelled
and applauded and he nodded to them in the most fatherly, friendly way
as though to say "How are you, I don't just remember your name but I'm
glad to see you--" It was so much sweeter than if he had got up and
bowed as I would have done.


SAN ANTONIO

I knew more about Texas than the Texans and when they told me I would
find summer here I smiled knowingly-- That is all the smiling I have
done---Did you ever see a stage set for a garden or wood scene by
daylight or Coney Island in March--that is what the glorious, beautiful
baking city of San Antonio is like.  There is mud and mud and mud--in
cans, in the gardens of the Mexicans and snow around the palms and
palmettos-- Does the sun shine anywhere?  Are people ever warm-- It is
raw, ugly and muddy, the Mexicans are merely dirty and not picturesque.
I am greatly disappointed.  But I have set my teeth hard and I will go
on and see it through to the bitter end-- But I will not write anything
for publication until I can take a more cheerful view of it.  I already
have reached the stage where I admit the laugh is on me-- But there is
still London to look forward to and this may get better when the sun
comes out---I went to the fort to-day and was most courteously
received.  But they told me I should go on to Laredo, if I expected to
see any campaigning-- There is no fighting nor is any expected but they
say they will give me a horse and I can ride around the chaparral as
long as I want.  I will write you from Laredo, where I go to-morrow,
Saturday--

DICK.


At Laredo Richard left the beaten track of the traveller, and with
Trooper Tyler, who acted as his guide, joined Captain Hardie in his
search for Garza.  The famous revolutionist was supposed to be in
hiding this side of the border, and the Mexican Government had asked
the United States to find him and return him to the officials of his
own country.


In Camp, February 2nd.

DEAR MOTHER:--

We have stopped by the side of a trail for a while and I will take the
chance it gives me to tell you what I have been doing.  After Tyler and
I returned to camp, we had a day of rest before Captain Hardie arrived.
He is a young, red-moustached, pointed-bearded chap with light blue
eyes, rough with living in the West but most kind hearted and
enthusiastic.  He treats me as though I were his son which is rather
absurd as he is only up to my shoulder.  It is so hot I cannot make the
words go straight and you must not mind if I wander.  We are hugging a
fence for all the shade there is and the horses and men have all
crawled to the dark side of it and are sleeping or swearing at the sun.
It is about two o'clock and we have been riding since half-past seven.
I have had a first rate time but I do not see that there has been much
in it to interest any one but myself and where Harper Brothers or the
"gentle reader" comes in, I am afraid I cannot see, and if I cannot see
it I fear he will be in a bad way.  It has pleased and interested me to
see how I could get along under difficult circumstances and with so
much discomfort but as I say I was not sent out here to improve my
temper or my health or to make me more content with my good things in
the East.  If we could have a fight or something that would excuse and
make a climax for all this marching and reconnoitering and discomfort
the story would have a suitable finale and a raison d'etre.  However, I
may get something out of it if only to abuse the Government for their
stupidity in chasing a jack rabbit with a brass band or by praising the
men for doing their duty when they know there is no duty to be done.
This country is more like the ocean than anything else and drives one
crazy with its monotony and desolation.  And to think we went to war
with Mexico for it-- To-day is my tenth day with the troops in the camp
and in the field and I will leave them as soon as this scout is over
which will be in three days at the most.  Then I will go to Corpus
Christi and from there to the ranches but I will wait until I get
baths, hair cuts and a dinner and cool things to drink-- One thing has
pleased me very much and that is that I, with Tyler and the Mexican
Scout made the second best riding record of the troop since they have
been in the field this winter.  The others rode 115 miles in 32 hours,
four of them under the first Sergeant, after revolutionists, and we
made 110 miles in 33 hours.  The rest of the detachment made 90 miles
and our having the extra thirty to our credit was an accident.  On the
31st Hardie sent out the scout and two troopers, of which Tyler was
one, to get a trail and as I had been resting and loafing for three
days, I went out with them.  We left at eight after breakfast and
returned at seven, having made thirty miles.  When we got in we found
that a detachment was going out on information sent in while we were
out.  Tyler was in it and so we got fresh horses and put out at nine
o'clock by moonlight.  That was to keep the people in the ranch from
knowing we were going out.  We rode until half-past three in the
morning and then camped at the side of the road until half--past six,
when we rode on until five in the afternoon.  The men who were watching
to see me give up grew more and more interested as the miles rolled out
and the First Sergeant was very fearful for his record for which he has
been recommended for the certificate of merit.  The Captain was very
much pleased and all the men came and spoke to me.  It must have been a
good ride for Tyler who is a fifth year man was so tired that he paid a
man to do his sentry duty.  We slept at Captain Hunter's camp that last
night and we both came on this morning, riding thirty miles up to two
o'clock to-day.  From here we go on into the brush again.  I am very
proud of that riding record and of my beard which is fine.  I will
finish this when we get near a post-office.

DICK.


February 4th-- We rode forty miles through the brush but saw nothing of
Garza, who was supposed to be in it.  But we captured 3 revolutionists,
one of whom ran away but the scout got him.  Hardie, Tyler, who is his
orderly, and the scout and I took them in because the rest of the
column was lagging in the rear and the Lieutenant got bally hooly for
it.  Tyler disarmed one and I took away the other chaps things.  Then
we took a fourth in and let them all go for want of evidence and after
some of the ranch men had identified them.


CORPUS CHRISTI, February 6.

We ended our scout yesterday, and camped at Captain Hunter's last
night-- Mother can now rest her soul in peace as I have done with
scoutings and have replaced the free and easy belt and revolver for the
black silk suspenders and the fire badge of civilization.  I am still
covered with 11 days dirt but will get lots of good things to eat and
drink and smoke at Corpus Christi to night, where I will stay for two
days.  I am writing this on the car and a ranger is shooting splinters
out of the telegraph poles from the window in front and has a New York
drummer in a state of absolute nervous prostration.  I met the Rangers
last night as we came into camp and find them quite the most
interesting things yet.  They are just what I expected to find here and
have not disappointed me.  Everything else is either what we know it to
be and know all about or else is disappointingly commonplace.  I mean
we know certain things are picturesque and I find them so but they have
been "done" to death and new material seems so scarce.  I am sometimes
very fearful of the success of the letters-- However, the Rangers I
simply loved.  They were gentle voiced and did not swear as the
soldiers do and some of them were as handsome men as I ever saw and SO
BIG.  And such children.  They showed me all their tricks at the
request of the Adjutant General, who looks upon them as his special
property.  They shot four shots into a tree with a revolver, going at
full gallop, hit a mark with both hands at once, shot with the pistol
upside down and the Captain put eight shots into a board with a
Winchester, while I was putting two into the field around it.  We got
along very well indeed and they were quite keen for me to go back and
chase Garza.  They are sure they have him now.  I gave the Captain
permission to put four shots into my white helmet.  He only put two and
the rest of the company thinking their reputations were at stake
whipped out their guns and snatched up their rifles and blazed away
until they danced the hat all over the ranch.  Then remorse overcame
them and they proposed taking up a collection to get me a sombrero,
which I stopped.  So Nora's hat is gone but I am going to get another
and save myself from sunstroke again.  The last part of the ride was
enlivened by the presence of three Mexican murderers handcuffed and
chained with iron bands around the neck, that is Texas civilization
isn't it--

I have had my dinner and a fine dinner it was with fresh fish and duck
and oysters and segars which I have not had for a week.  I am finishing
this at Constantine's and will be here for two days to write things and
will then go on to King's ranch and from there to San Antonio, where I
will also rest a week.  I will just about get through my schedule in
the ten weeks at this rate.  I had a good time in the bush and am
enjoying it very much though it is lonely now and then-- Still, it is
very interesting and if the stories amount to anything I will be
pleased but I am constantly wondering how on earth Chas stood it as he
did.  He is a hero to me for I have some hope of getting back and he
had not-- He is a sport-- How I will sleep to night--a real bed and
sheets and pajamas, after the ground and the same clothes for eleven
days.

of love.

DICK.


While Richard was travelling in the West, his second volume of short
stories, "Van Bibber and Others," was published.  The volume was
dedicated to my father, who wrote Richard the following letter:


PHILADELPHIA, February 15, 1892.

MY DEAR OWN DICK:

I have not been the complete letter writer I should have been, as I
told you on Saturday, but I know you will  understand.  Your two good
letters came this evening, one to Mamma and one to Nora.  They were a
good deal to us all, most, of course, to your dear mother and sister,
who have a fond, foolish fancy or love for you--strange--isn't it?
Yes, dear boy, I liked the new story very, very much.  It was in your
best book and in fine spirit, and I liked, too, the dedication of the
book--its meaning and its manner.  I am glad to be associated with my
dear boy and with his work even in that brief way.  You may not yet
thought about it after this fashion, but I have thought a good deal
about it.  Reports come to me of you from many sources, and they are
all good, and they all reflect honor upon me-- Upon me as I'm getting
ready to salute the world, as our French friends say.  It is very
pleasant to me as I think it over to feel and to know that my boy has
honored my name, that he has done something good and useful in the
world and for the world.  I have something more than pride in you.  I
am grateful to you.  If this is a little prosie, dear old fellow,
forgive it.  It is late at night and I am a little tired, and being
tired stupid.  You saw The Atlantic notice of your work.  I wish you
could have heard Nora on the author of it, who would not have been
happy in his mind if he had unhappily heard her.  She went for that
Heathen Chinee like a wild cat.  No disrespect to her, but, all the
same, like a wild cat.  To me it was interesting.  I did not agree with
it, but here and there I saw the flash of truth even in the adverse
praise.  I should have had more respect for the author's opinion if he
had liked that vital speck, Raegen.  If he could not see the divine,
human spark in that--a flash from Calvary, what is the use of
considering him?  My greatest pride in you, that which has added some
sweetness and joy to my life, has been the recognition that something
of the divine element was given you, and that your voice rang out sweet
and pure at a time when other voices were sounding the fascinations of
impurity.  That, like Christ, you taught humanity.  Don't be afraid of
being thought "fresh," fear to be thought "knowing."  Life isn't much
worth at best,--it is worth nothing at all unless some good be done in
it---the more, the better.  Don't make it too serious either.  Enjoy it
as you go, but after a fashion that will bring no reproach to your
manhood.  Don't be afraid to preach the truth and above all the
religion of humanity.  Good night, dear boy.  I'm a little tired to
night.  With great love,

DAD.


ANADARKO--February 26th, 1892.

DEAR FAMILY:--

I could not write you before as I have been traveling from pillars to
posts, (a joke), in a stage, night and day.  I went to Fort Reno from
Oklahoma City where they drove me crazy almost with town lots and lot
sites and homestead holdings.  It was all raw and mean, and greedy for
money and a man is much better off in every way in a tenement on Second
Avenue than the "owner of his own home" in one of these mushroom
cities-- So I think.  I went to Fort Reno by stage and it seemed to me
that I was really in the West for the first time-- The rest has been as
much like the oil towns around Pittsburgh as anything else.  But here
there are rolling prairie lands with millions of prairie dogs and deep
canons and bluffs of red clay that stand out as clear as a razor
hollowed and carved away by the water long ago.  And the grass is as
high as a stirrup and the trees very plentiful after the plains of
Texas.  The men at Fort Reno were the best I have met, indeed I am just
a little tired of trying to talk of things of interest to the Second
Lieutenant's intellect.  But I had to leave there because I had missed
the beef issue and had to see it and as it was due here I pushed on.
This post is very beautiful but the men are very young and civil
appointments mainly, which means that they have not been to West Point
but had fathers and have friends with influence and they are fresh.
But the scenery around the post is delightfully wild and big and there
is an Indian camp at the foot of the hill on which the fort is stuck.
Mother, instead of going to Europe, should come here and see her
Indians.  Only if she did she would bring a dozen or more of the
children back with her.  They are the brightest spot in my trip and I
spend the mornings and afternoons trying to get them to play with me.
They are very shy and pretty and beautifully barbaric and wear the most
gorgeous trappings.  The women, the older ones, are the ugliest women I
ever saw.  But the men are fine.  I never saw such color as they give
to the landscape and one always thinks they have dressed up just to
please you.  I have spent most of my time and money in buying things
from them but they are very dear because the Indians take long to make
them and do not like to part with them.  I have had rough times lately
but I think I would be content to remain in the west six months if I
could.  It is the necessity of leaving places I like and pushing on to
places I don't, I dislike.  Reno was fine with a band and lots of fine
fellows.  This post is not so queer but they are so young-- It makes a
great bit of color though with the yellow capes of the cavalry and the
soldiers wig--waging red and white flags at other soldiers eight miles
away on other mountains and the Indians in yellow buckskin and blankets
and their faces painted too.  I went to the beef issue to-day--it was
not a pretty sight and most barbarous and cruel.  I also went to a
council at which the chiefs were protesting against the cutting down of
their rations which is Commissioner Morgan's doing and which it is
expected will lead to war-- We went in out of curiosity and without
knowing it was a Council and were very much ashamed when one of the
Chiefs rose and said he was glad to see the officers present as they
were the best friends the Indians had and the only men they could
respect in times of peace as a friend, or in times of war as an enemy.
At which we took off our hats and sat it through.  Mother's blood would
rise if she could hear the stories they tell, and they are so dignified
and polite.  They have an Indian troop here, like the one described in
The Weekly, which you should read and the Captain told them I was a
great Chief from the East, whereat all the soldiers who were of noble
lineage claimed their privilege of shaking hands with me, which had a
demoralizing effect upon the formation and the white privates were
either convulsed with mirth or red with indignation.  But you cannot
treat them like white men who do not know their ancestors-- Dad's
letter was the best I have ever got from him and he had always better
write when he is tired.  I will always keep it.

DICK.


DENVER--March 7, 1892.

DEAR FAMILY:

I arrived in Denver Friday night and realized that I was in a city
again where the more you order people about the more they do for you,
being civilized and so understanding that you mean to tip them.  I
found my first letter on the newsstand and was very much pleased with
it, and with the way they put it out.  The proof was perfect and if
there had been more pictures I would have been entirely satisfied, as
it was I was very much pleased.  My baggage had not come, so covered
with mud and dust and straw from the stages and generally disreputable
I went to see a burlesque, and said "Front row, end seat," just as
naturally as though I was in evening dress and high hat--and then I
sank into a beautiful deep velvet chair and saw Amazon marches and
ladies in tights and heard the old old jokes and the old old songs we
know so well and sing so badly.  The next morning I went for my mail
and the entire post office came out to see me get it.  It took me until
seven in the evening to finish it, and I do not know that it will ever
be answered.  The best of it was that you were all pleased with my
letters.  That put my mind at rest.  Then there was news of deaths and
marriages and engagements and the same people doing the same things
they did when I went away.  I did not intend to present any letters as
I was going away that night to Creede, but I found I could not get any
money unless some one identified me so I presented one to a Mr. Jerome
who all the bankers said they would be only too happy to oblige.  After
one has been variously taken for a drummer, photographer and has been
offered so much a line to "write up" booming towns, it is a relief to
get back to a place where people know you.--I told Mr. Jerome I had a
letter of introduction and that I was Mr. Davis and he shook hands and
then looked at the letter and said "Good Heavens are you that Mr.
Davis" and then rushed off and brought back the entire establishment
brokers, bankers and mine owners and they all sat around and told me
funny stories and planned more things for me to do and eat than I could
dispose of in a month.

I am now en route to Creede.  Creede when you first see it in print
looks like creede but after you have been in Denver or Colorado even
for one day it reads like C R E E D E.  All the men on this car think
they are going to make their fortunes, and toward that end they have on
new boots and flannel shirts, and some of them seeing my beautiful
clothing and careful array came over and confided to me that they were
really not so tough as they looked and had never worn a flannel shirt
before.  This car is typical of what they told me I would find at
Creede.  There are rich mine owners who are pointed out by the
conductor as the fifth part owner of the "Pot Luck" mine, and dudes in
astrakan fur coats over top boots and new flannel shirts, and hardened
old timers with their bedding and tin pans, who have prospected all
over the state and women who are smoking and drinking.

I feel awfully selfish whenever I look out of the car window.
Switzerland which I have never seen is a spot on the map compared to
this.  The mountains go up with snow on one side and black rows of
trees and rocks on the other, and the clouds seem packed down between
them.  The sun on the snow and the peaks peering above the clouds is
all new to me and so very beautiful that I would like to buy a mountain
and call it after my best girl.  I will finish this when I get to
Creede.  I expect to make my fortune there.  DICK.


CREEDE, March 7.

A young man in a sweater and top boots met me at the depot and said
that I was Mr. Davis and that he was a young man whose life I had
written in "There was 90 and 9."  He was from Buffalo and was editing a
paper in Creede.  He said I was to stop with him-- Creede is built of
new pine boards and lies between two immense mountains covered with
pines and snow.  The town is built in the gulley and when the spring
freshets come will be a second Johnstown.  Faber, the young man, took
me to the Grub State Cabin where I found two most amusing dudes and
thoroughbred sports from Boston, Harvard men living in a cabin ten by
eight with four bunks and a stove, two banjos and H O P E.  They own
numerous silver mines, lots, and shares, but I do not believe they have
five dollars in cash amongst them.  They have a large picture of myself
for one of the ORNAMENTS and are great good fellows.  We sat up in our
bunks until two this morning talking and are planning to go to Africa
and Mexico and Asia Minor together.--Lots of love.

DICK.


Very happy indeed to be back in his beloved town, Richard returned to
New York late in March, 1892, and resumed his editorial duties.  But on
this occasion his stay was of particularly short duration, and in May,
he started for his long-wished-for visit to London.  The season there
was not yet in full swing, and after spending a few days in town,
journeyed to Oxford, where he settled down to amuse himself and collect
material for his first articles on English life as he found it.  In
writing of this visit to Oxford, H. J.  Whigham, one of Richard's
oldest friends, and who afterward served with him in several campaigns,
said:

"When we first met Richard Harding Davis he was living, to all
practical purposes, the life of an undergraduate at Balliol College,
Oxford.  Anyone at all conversant with the customs of universities,
especially with the idiosyncrasies of Oxford, knows that for a person
who is not an undergraduate to share the life of undergraduates on
equal terms, to take part in their adventures, to be admitted to their
confidence is more difficult than it is for the camel to pass through
the eye of a needle or for the rich man to enter heaven.  It was
characteristic of Davis that although he was a few years older than the
average university "man" and came from a strange country and, moreover,
had no official reason for being at Oxford at all, he was accepted as
one of themselves by the Balliol undergraduates, in fact, lived in
Balliol for at least a college term, and happening to fall in with a
somewhat enterprising generation of Balliol men he took the lead in
several escapades which have been written into Oxford history.  There
is in the makeup of the best type of college undergraduate a wonderful
spirit of adventure, an unprejudiced view of life, an almost Quixotic
feeling for romance, a disdain of sordid or materialistic motives,
which together make the years spent at a great university the most
golden of the average man's career.  These characteristics Davis was
fortunate enough to retain through all the years of his life.  The same
spirit that took him out with a band of Oxford youths to break down an
iron barrier set by an insolent landowner across the navigable waters
of Shakespeare's Avon carried him, in after years, to the battlefields
where Greece fought against the yoke of Turkey, to the insurrecto camps
of Cuba, to the dark horrors of the Congo, to Manchuria, where gallant
Japan beat back the overwhelming power of Russia, to Belgium, where he
saw the legions of Germany trampling over the prostrate bodies of a
small people.  Romance was never dead while Davis was alive."

That Richard lost no time in making friends at Oxford as, indeed, he
never failed to do wherever he went, the following letters to his
mother would seem to show:


OXFORD--May, 1892.

DEAR FAMILY:

I came down here on Saturday morning with the Peels, who gave an
enormous boating party and luncheon on a tiny little island.  The day
was beautiful with a warm brilliant sun, and the river was just as
narrow and pretty as the head of the Squan river, and with old walls
and college buildings added.  We had the prettiest Mrs. Peel in our
boat and Mrs. Joseph Chamberlain, who was Miss Endicott and who is very
sweet and pretty.  We raced the other punts and rowboats and soon,
after much splashing and exertion, reached the head of the river.  Then
we went to, tea in New College and to see the sights of the different
colleges now on the Thames.  The barges of the colleges, painted
different colors and gilded like circus band-wagons and decorated with
coats of arms and flying great flags, lined the one shore for a quarter
of a mile and were covered by girls in pretty frocks and under-grads in
blazers.  Then the boats came into sight one after another with the men
running alongside on the towpath.  This was one of the most remarkable
sights of the country so far.  There were over six hundred men coming
six abreast, falling and stumbling and pushing, shouting and firing
pistols.  It sounded like a cavalry charge and the line seemed endless.
The whole thing was most theatrical and effective.  Then we went to the
annual dinner of the Palmerston Club, where I made a speech which was,
as there is no one else to tell you, well received, "being frequently
interrupted with applause," from both the diners and the ladies in the
gallery.  It was about Free Trade and the way America was
misrepresented in the English papers, and composed of funny stories
which had nothing to do with the speech.  I did not know I was going to
speak until I got there, and considering the fact, as Wilson says, that
your uncle was playing on a strange table with a crooked cue he did
very well.  The next morning we breakfasted with the Bursar of Trinity
and had luncheon with the Viscount St. Cyres to meet Lord and Lady
Coleridge.  St. Cyres is very shy and well-bred, and we would have had
a good time had not the M. P.'s present been filled with awe of the
Lord Chief Justice and failed to draw him out.  As it was he told some
very funny stories; then we went to tea with Hubert Howard, in whose
rooms I live and am now writing, and met some stupid English women and
shy girls.  Then we dined with the dons at New College, so--called
because it is eight hundred years old.  We sat at a high table in a big
hall hung with pictures and lit by candles.  The under-grads sat
beneath in gowns and rattled pewter mugs.  We all wore evening dress
and those that had them red and white fur collars.  After dinner we
left the room according to some process of selection, carrying our
napkins with us.  We entered a room called the Commons, where we drank
wines and ate nuts and raisins.  It was all very solemn and dull and
very dignified.  Outside it was quite light although nine o'clock.
Then we marched to another room where there were cigars and brandy and
soda, but Arthur Pollen and I had to go and take coffee with the Master
of Balliol, the only individual of whom Pollen stands in the least awe.
He was a dear old man who said, "O yes, you're from India," and on my
saying "No, from America"; he said, "O yes, it's the other one."  I
found the other one was an Indian princess in a cashmere cloak and
diamonds, who looked so proud and lovely and beautiful that I wanted to
take her out to one of the seats in the quadrangle and let her weep on
my shoulder.  How she lives among these cold people I cannot
understand.  We were all to go to a concert in the chapel, and half of
the party started off, but the Master's wife said, "Oh, I am sure the
Master expects them to wait for him in the hall.  It is always done."
At which all the women made fluttering remarks of sympathy and the men
raced off to bring the others back.  Only the Indian girl and I
remained undisturbed and puzzled.  The party came back, but the Master
saw them and said, "Well, it does not matter, but it is generally
done."  At which we all felt guilty.  When we got to the chapel
everybody stood up until the Master's party sat down, but as it was
broken in the middle of the procession, they sat down, and then, seeing
we had not all passed, got up again, so that I felt like saying, "As
you were, men," as they do out West in the barracks.  Then Lord
Coleridge in taking off his overcoat took off his undercoat, too, and
stood unconscious of the fact before the whole of Oxford.  The faces of
the audience which packed the place were something wonderful to see;
their desire to laugh at a tall, red-faced man who looks like a bucolic
Bill Nye struggling into his coat, and then horror at seeing the Chief
Justice in his shirt-sleeves, was a terrible effort--and no one would
help him, on the principle, I suppose, that the Queen of Spain has no
legs.  He would have been struggling yet if I had not, after watching
him and Lady Coleridge struggling with him, for a full minute, taken
his coat and firmly pulled the old gentleman into it, at which he
turned his head and winked.

I will go back to town by the first to see the Derby and will get into
lodgings there.  I AM HAVING A VERY GOOD TIME AND AM VERY WELL.  The
place is as beautiful as one expects and yet all the time startling one
with its beauty.

DICK.


When the season at Oxford was over Richard returned to London and took
a big sunny suite of rooms in the Albany.  Here he settled down to
learn all he could of London, its ways and its people.  In New York he
had already met a number of English men and women distinguished in
various walks of life, and with these as a nucleus he soon extended his
circle of friends until it became as large as it was varied.  In his
youth, and indeed throughout his life, Richard had the greatest
affection for England and the English.  No truer American ever lived,
but he thought the United States and Great Britain were bound by ties
that must endure always.  He admired British habits, their
cosmopolitanism and the very simplicity of their mode of living.  He
loved their country life, and the swirl of London never failed to
thrill him.  During the last half of his life Richard had perhaps as
many intimate friends in London as in New York.  His fresh point of
view, his very eagerness to understand theirs, made them welcome him
more as one of their own people than as a stranger.


LONDON, June 3, 1892.

DEAR FAMILY:

I went out to the Derby on Wednesday and think it is the most
interesting thing I ever saw over here.  It is SO like these people
never to have seen it.  It seems to be chiefly composed of
costermongers and Americans.  I got a box-seat on a public coach and
went out at ten.  We rode for three hours in a procession of donkey
shays, omnibuses, coaches, carriages, vans, advertising wagons; every
sort of conveyance stretching for sixteen miles, and with people lining
the sides to look on.  I spent my time when I got there wandering
around over the grounds, which were like Barnum's circus multiplied by
thousands.  It was a beautiful day and quite the most remarkable sight
of my life.  Much more wonderful than Johnstown, so you see it must
have impressed me.  We were five hours getting back, the people singing
all the way and pelting one another and saying funny impudent things.

My rooms are something gorgeous.  They are on the first floor, looking
into Piccadilly from a court, and they are filled with Hogarth's
prints, old silver, blue and white china, Zulu weapons and fur rugs,
and easy chairs of India silk.  You never saw such rooms!  And a very
good servant, who cooks and valets me and runs errands and takes such
good care of me that last night Cust and Balfour called at one to get
some supper and he would not let them in.  Think of having the Leader
of the House of Commons come to ask you for food and having him sent
away.  Burdett-Coutts heard of my being here in the papers and wrote me
to dine with him tonight.  I lunched with the Tennants today; no
relation to Mrs. Stanley, and it was informal and funny rather.  The
Earl of Spender was there and Lord Pembroke and a lot of women.  They
got up and walked about and changed places and seemed to know one
another better than we do at home.  I think I will go down to Oxford
for Whitsuntide, which is a heathen institution here which sends
everyone away just as I want to meet them.

I haven't written anything yet.  I find it hard to do so.  I think I
would rather wait until I get home for the most of it.  Chas. will be
here in less than a week now and we will have a good time.  I have
planned it out for days.  He must go to Oxford and meet those boys, and
then, if he wishes, on to Eastnor, which I learn since my return is one
of the show places of England.  I am enjoying myself, it is needless to
say, very much, and am well and happy.

DICK.


During these first days in England Richard spent much of his time at
Eastnor, Lady Brownlow's place in Lincolnshire, and one of the most
beautiful estates in England.  Harry Cust, to whom my brother
frequently refers in his letters, was the nephew of Lady Brownlow, and
a great friend of Richard's.  At that time Cust was the Conservative
nominee for Parliament from Lincolnshire, and Richard took a most
active part in the campaign.  Happily, we were both at Lady Brownlow's
during its last few tense days, as well as on the day the votes were
counted, and Cust was elected by a narrow margin.  Of our thrilling
adventures Richard afterward wrote at great length in "Our English
Cousins."


LONDON, July 6, 1892.

DEAR MOTHER:

On the Fourth of July, Lady Brownlow sent into town and had a big
American flag brought out and placed over the house, which was a great
compliment, as it was seen and commented on for miles around.  Cushing
of Boston, a very nice chap and awfully handsome, is there, too.  The
same morning I went out to photograph the soldiers, and Lord William
Frederick, who is their colonel, charged them after me whenever I
appeared.  It seems he has a sense of humor and liked the idea of
making an American run on the Fourth of July from Red-coats.  I doubt
if the five hundred men who were not on horseback thought it as funny.
They chased me till I thought I would die.  The Conservative member for
the county got in last night and we rejoiced greatly, as the moral
effect will help Harry Cust greatly.  His election takes place next
Monday.  The men went in to hear the vote declared after dinner, and so
did two of the girls, who got Lady Brownlow's consent at dinner, and
then dashed off to change their gowns before she could change her mind.
As we were intent on seeing the fun and didn't want them, we took them
just where we would have gone anyway, which was where the fighting was.
And they showed real sporting blood and saw the other real sort.  There
were three of us to each girl, and it was most exciting, with stones
flying and windows crashing and cheers and groans.  A political meeting
or election at home is an afternoon tea to the English ones.  When we
came back the soldiers were leaving the Park to stop the row, and as we
flew past, the tenants ran to the gate and cheered for the Tory victory
in "good old lopes."  When we got to the house the servants ran
cheering all over the shop and rang the alarm bell and built fires, and
we had a supper at one-fifteen.  What they will do on the night of
Cust's election, I cannot imagine-- burn the house down probably.
Cushing and I enjoy it immensely.  We know them well enough now to be
as funny as we like without having them stare.  They are nice when you
know them, but you've GOT to know them first.  I had a great dinner at
Farrar's.  All the ecclesiastical lights of England in knee-breeches
were there, and the American Minister and Phillips Brooks.  It was
quite novel and fun.  Lots of love.  I have all the money I want.

DICK.


With Cust properly elected, Richard and I returned to the Albany and
settled down to enjoy London from many angles.  Although my brother had
been there but a few weeks, his acquaintances among the statesmen,
artists, social celebrities, and the prominent actors of the day was
quite as extraordinary as his geographical and historical knowledge of
the city.  We gave many jolly parties, and on account of Richard's
quickly acquired popularity were constantly being invited to dinners,
dances, and less formal but most amusing Bohemian supper-parties.
During these days there was little opportunity for my brother to do
much writing, but he was very busy making mental notes not only for his
coming book on the English people, but for a number of short stories
which he wrote afterward in less strenuous times.  We returned to New
York in August, and Richard went to Marion to rest from his social
activities, and to work on his English articles.




CHAPTER VI

THE MEDITERRANEAN AND PARIS

It was, I think, the year previous to this that my mother and father
had deserted Point Pleasant as a place to spend their summer vacations
in favor of Marion, on Cape Cod, and Richard and I, as a matter of
course, followed them there.  At that time Marion was a simple little
fishing village where a few very charming people came every summer and
where the fishing was of the best.  In all ways the life was most
primitive, and happily continued so for many years.  In, these early
days Grover Cleveland and his bride had a cottage there, and he and
Joseph Jefferson, who lived at Buzzard's Bay, and my father went on
daily fishing excursions.  Richard Watson Gilder was one of the
earliest settlers of the summer colony, and many distinguished members
of the literary and kindred professions came there to visit him.  It
was a rather drowsy life for those who didn't fish--a great deal of
sitting about on one's neighbor's porch and discussion of the latest
novel or the newest art, or of one's soul, and speculating as to what
would probably become of it.  From the first Richard formed a great
affection for the place, and after his marriage adopted it as his
winter as well as his summer home.  As a workshop he had two rooms in
one of the natives' cottages, and two more charming rooms it would be
hard to imagine.  The little shingled cottage was literally covered
with honeysuckle, and inside there were the old wall-papers, the open
hearths, the mahogany furniture, and the many charming things that had
been there for generations, and all of which helped to contribute to
the quaint peaceful atmosphere of the place.  Dana Gibson had a cottage
just across the road, and around the corner Gouverneur Morris lived
with his family.  At this time neither of these friends of Richard, nor
Richard himself, allied themselves very closely to the literary colony
and its high thoughts, but devoted most of their time to sailing about
Sippican Harbor, playing tennis and contributing an occasional short
story or an illustration to a popular magazine.  But after the colony
had taken flight, Richard often remained long into the fall, doing
really serious work and a great deal of it.  At such times he had to
depend on a few friends who came to visit him, but principally on the
natives to many of whom he was greatly attached.  It was during these
days that he first met his future wife, Cecil Clark, whose father, John
M. Clark of Chicago, was one of the earliest of the summer colonists to
build his own home at Marion.  A most charming and hospitable home it
was, and it was in this same house where we had all spent so many happy
hours that Richard was married and spent his honeymoon, and for several
years made his permanent home.  Of the life of Marion during this later
period, he became an integral part, and performed his duties as one of
its leading citizens with much credit to the town and its people.  For
Marion Richard always retained a great affection, for there he had
played and worked many of his best years.  He had learned to love
everything of which the quaint old town was possessed, animate and
inanimate, and had I needed any further proof of how deeply the good
people of Marion loved Richard, the letters I received from many of
them at the time of his death would show.

In the early fall of 1892 Richard returned to his editorial work on
Harper's Weekly, and one of the first assignments he gave was to
despatch himself to Chicago to report the Dedication Exercises of the
World's Fair.  That the trip at least started out little to my
brother's liking the following seems to show.  However, Richard's moods
frequently changed with the hour, and it is more than possible that
before the letter was sent he was enjoying himself hugely and regarding
Chicago with his usual kindly eyes.


Chicago Club,

October 2, 1892.

DEAR FAMILY:

Though lost to sight I am still thinking of you sadly.  It seems that I
took a coupe after leaving you and after living in it for a few years I
grew tired and got out on the prairie and walked along drinking in the
pure air from the lakes and reading Liebig's and Cooper's advs.  After
a brisk ten mile walk I reentered my coupe and we in time drew up
before a large hotel inhabited by a clerk and a regular boarder.  I am
on the seventh floor without a bathroom or electric button--I merely
made remarks and then returned to town in a railroad train which runs
conveniently near.  After gaining civilization I made my way through
several parades or it may have been the same one to the reviewing
stand.  My progress was marked by mocking remarks by the police who
asked of each other to get on to my coat and on several occasions I was
mistaken by a crowd of some thousand people for the P----e of W----s,
and tumultuously cheered.  At last I found an inspector of police on
horseback, who agreed to get me to the stand if it took a leg.  He
accordingly charged about 300 women and clubbed eight men--I counted
them--and finally got me in.  He was very drunk but he was very good to
me.



Once back from Chicago Richard divided his time between his desk at
Franklin Square, his rooms on Twenty-eighth Street, and in quickly
picking up the friendships and the social activities his trip to
England had temporarily broken off.  Much as he now loved London, he
was still an enthusiastic New Yorker, and the amount of work and play
he accomplished was quite extraordinary.  Indeed it is difficult to
understand where he found the time to do so much.  In addition to his
work on Harper's he wrote many short stories and special articles, not
only because he loved the mere writing of them, but because he had come
to so greatly enjoy the things he could buy with the money his labors
now brought him.  His pleasures had increased as steadily as the prices
he could now command for his stories, and in looking back on those days
it is rather remarkable when one considers his age, the temptations
that surrounded him, and his extraordinary capacity for enjoyment, that
he never seems to have forgotten the balance between work and play, and
stuck to both with an unswerving and unceasing enthusiasm.  However,
after four months of New York, he decided it was high time for him to
be off again, and he arranged with the Harpers to spend the late winter
and the spring in collecting material for the two sets of articles
which afterward appeared in book form under the titles of "The Rulers
of the Mediterranean" and "About Paris." He set sail for Gibraltar the
early part of February, 1893, and the following letters describe his
leisurely progress about the Mediterranean ports.


NEW YORK, February 3, 1893.

DEAREST MOTHER:

This is a little present for you and a goodby.  Your packing-case is
what I need and what I shall want, and I love it because you made it.
But as YOU say, we understand and do not have to write love letters;
you have given me all that is worth while in me, and I love you so that
I look forward already over miles and miles and days and months, and
just see us sitting together at Marion and telling each other how good
it is to be together again and holding each other's hands.  I don't
believe you really know how HAPPY I am in loving you, dear, and in
having you say nice things about me.  God bless you, dearest, and may I
never do anything to make you feel less proud of your wicked son.

DICK.


Off Gibraltar,
  February 12, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

Today is Sunday.  We arrive at Gibraltar at five tomorrow morning and
the boat lies there until nine o'clock.  Unless war and pestilence have
broken out in other places, I shall go over to Tangiers in a day or
two, and from there continue on my journey as mapped out when I left.
I have had a most delightful trip and the most enjoyable I have ever
taken by sea.  These small boats are as different from the big
twin-screw steamers as a flat from a Broadway hotel.

Everyone gets to know everything about everyone else, and it has been
more like a yacht than a passenger steamer.  When I first came on board
I thought I would not find in any new old country I was about to visit
anything more foreign than the people, and I was right, but they are
most amusing and I have learned a great deal.  They are different from
any people I know, and are the Americans we were talking about.  The
ones of whom I used to read in The Atlantic and Blackwood's, as
traveling always and sinking out of sight whenever they reached home.
They, with the exception of a Boston couple, know none of my friends or
my haunts, and I have learned a great deal in meeting them.  It has
been most BROADENING and the change has been SUCH a rest.  I had no
idea of how tired I was of talking about the theater of Arts and
Letters and Miss Whitney's debut and my Soul.  These people are simple
and unimaginative and bourgeois to a degree and as kind-hearted and
apparent as animal alphabets.  I do not think I have had such a
complete change or rest in years, and I am sure I have not laughed so
much for as long.  Of course, the idea of a six months' holiday is
enough to make anyone laugh at anything, but I find that besides that I
was a good deal harassed and run down, and I am glad to cut off from
everything and start fresh.  I feel miserably selfish about it all the
time.

These Germans run everything as though you were the owner of the line.
The discipline is like that of the German Army or of a man-of-war,
everything moves by the stroke of a bell, and they have had dances and
speeches and concerts and religious services and lectures every other
minute.  Into all of these I have gone with much enthusiasm.  We have
at the captain's table Dr. Field, the editor of The Evangelist, John
Russell, a Boston Democrat, who was in Congress and who has been in
public life for over forty years.  A Tammany sachem, who looks like and
worships Tweed, and who says what I never heard an American off the
stage say:  "That's me.  That's what I do," he says.  "When I have
insomnia, I don't believe in your sleeping draughts.  I get up and go
round to Jake Stewart's on Fourteenth Street and eat a fry or a
porterhouse steak and then I sleep good---that's me."  There is also a
lively lady from Albany next to me and her husband, who tells anecdotes
of the war just as though it had happened yesterday.  Indeed, they are
all so much older than I that all their talk is about things I never
understood the truth about, and it is most interesting.  I really do
not know when I have enjoyed my meal time so much.  The food is very
good, although queer and German, and we generally take two hours to
each sitting.  Dr. Field is my especial prey and he makes me laugh
until I cry.  He is just like James Lewis in "A Night Off," and is
always rubbing his hands and smacking his lips over his own daring
exploits.  I twist everything he says into meaning something dreadful,
and he is instantly explaining he did not really see a bullfight, but
that he walked around the outside of the building.  I have promised to
show him life with a capital L, and he is afraid as death of me.  But
he got back at me grandly last night when he presented a testimonial to
the captain, and referred to the captain's wife and boy whom he is
going to see after a two years' absence, at which the captain wept and
everybody else wept.  And Field, seeing he had made a point, waved his
arms and cried, "I have never known a man who amounted to anything who
had not a good wife to care for--except YOU--" he shouted, pointing at
me, "and no woman will ever save YOU."  At which the passengers, who
fully appreciated how I had been worrying him, applauded loudly, and
the Doctor in his delight at having scored on me forgot to give the
captain his testimonial.

There are two nice girls on board from Chicago and a queer Southern
girl who paints pictures and sings and writes poetry, and who is
traveling with an odd married woman who is an invalid and who like
everyone else on board has apparently spent all her life away from
home.  I have spent my odd time in writing the story I told Dad the
night before I sailed and I think it in some ways the best, quite the
best, I have written.  I read it to the queer girl and her queer
chaperon and they weep whenever they speak of it, which they do every
half hour.  All the passengers apparently laid in a stock of
"Gallegher" and "The West" before starting, and young women in yachting
caps are constantly holding me up for autographs and favorite
quotations.  Yesterday we passed the Azores near enough to see the
windows in the houses, and we have seen other islands at different
times, which is quite refreshing.  Tomorrow I shall post this and the
trip will be over.  It has been a most happy start.  I am not going to
write letters often, but am going head over ears into this new life and
let the old one wait awhile.  You cannot handle Africa and keep up your
fences in New York at the same time.  I am now going out to talk to the
Boston couple, or to propose a lion hunt to Dr. Field.

Since I wrote that last I have seen Portugal.  It made me seem suddenly
very far away from New York. Portugal is a high hill with a white watch
tower on it flying signal flags.  It is apparently inhabited by one man
who lives in a long row of yellow houses with red roofs, and populated
by sheep who do grand acts of balancing on the side of the hill.  There
is also a Navy of a brown boat with a leg-of-mutton sail and a crew of
three men in the boat--not to speak of the dog.  It is a great thing to
have a traveled son.  None of you ever saw Portugal, yah!

I am now in Gibraltar.  It is a large place and there does not seem to
be room in this letter, in which to express my feelings about Moors in
bare legs and six thousand Red-coats and to hear Englishmen speak
again.  When I woke up Gibraltar was a black silhouette against the
sky, but toward the south there was a low line of mountains with a red
sky behind them, dim and mysterious and old, and that was Africa.  Then
Spain turned up all amethyst and green, and the Mediterranean as blue
as they tell you it is.  They wouldn't let me take my gun into
Gibraltar.  They know my reputation for war.

DICK.


GIBRALTAR.

February 14th, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

The luck of the British Army which I am modestly fond of comparing with
my own took a vacation yesterday as soon as I had set foot on land.  In
the first place Egypt had settled down to her sluggish Nile like calm
and cholera had quarantined the ship I wanted to take to Algiers,
shutting off Algiers and what was more important Tunis.  The Governor
was ill shutting off things I wanted and his adjutant was boorish and
proud and haughty.  Then I determined to go to Spain but found I had
arrived just one day too late for the last of the three days of the
Mardi Gras and too early for bull fights.  Had I taken Saavedra's
letters I should have gone to Madrid and met the Queen and other proud
folks.  So on the whole I was blue.  But I have now determined to take
a boat for Tangier at once where I have letters to the Duke de Tnas who
is the Master of the Hounds there and a great sport and they say it is
very amusing and exciting.  In a fortnight I shall go to Malta.  I
called on Harry Cust's brother and told him who I was and he took me in
and put me at the head of the table of young subalterns in grand
uniforms and we had marmalade and cold beef and beer and I was happy to
the verge of tears to hear English as she is spoke.  Then we went to a
picnic and took tea in a smuggler's cave and all the foxterriers ran
over the table cloth and the Captain spilt hot water over his white
flannels and jumped around on one leg.  After which we played a
handkerchief game sitting in a row and pelting the girls with a knotted
handkerchief and then fighting for it-- During one of these scrimmages
Mulvaney, two others and Learoyd came by and with eyes front and hands
at their caps marched on with stolid countenances, but their officers
were embarrassed.  It is hard to return a salute with your face in the
sand and a stout American sitting on your neck and pulling your first
lieutenant's leg.  I am now deeply engaged for dinners and dances and
teas and rides and am feeling very cheerful again.  I am also very well
thank you and have no illnesses of any sort.  You told me to be sure
and put that in-- As you see, I have cut out half of my trip to avoid
the cholera, so you need not worry about THAT.  To-day I am going over
the ramparts as much as they will allow and to-morrow I go to Tangier
where I expect to have some boar hunting.  I would suggest your getting
The Evangelist in a week or two as Dr. Field's letters cover all I have
seen.  I do not tell you anything about the place because you will read
that in the paper to the H. W. but I can assure you the girls are very
pretty and being garrison girls are not as shy as those at home in
England.  I am the first American they ever met they assure me every
hour and we get on very well notwithstanding.

You can imagine what it is like when Spaniards, Moors and English
Soldiers are all crowded into one long street with donkeys and geese
and priests and smugglers and men in polo clothes and soldiers in
football suits and sailors from the man-of-war.  Of course, the Rock is
the best story of it all.  It is a fair green smiling hill not a
fortress at all.  No more a fortress to look at than Fairmont Park
water works, but the joke of it is that under every bush there is a gun
and every gun is painted green and covered with hanging curtains of
moss and every promenade is undermined and the bleakest face of the
rock is tunnelled with rooms and halls.  Every night we are locked in
and the soldiers carry the big iron keys clanking through the streets.
It is going to make interesting reading.

DICK.


GIBRALTAR.

February 23rd, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

Aeneas who "ran the round of so many chances" in this neighborhood was
a stationary stay at home to what I have to do.  If I ever get away
from the Rock I shall be a traveller of the greatest possible
experience.

I came here intending to stay a week and to write my letter on Gib. and
on Tangier quietly and peacefully like a gentleman and then to go on to
Malta.  I love this place and there is something to do and see every
minute of the time but what happened was this:  All the boats that ever
left here stopped running, broke shafts, or went into quarantine or
just sailed by, and unless I want to spend two weeks on the sea in
order to have one at Malta, which is only a military station like this,
I must go off to-morrow with my articles unwritten, my photos
undeveloped and my dinner calls unpaid.  I am now waiting to hear if I
can get to Algiers by changing twice from one steamer to another along
the coast of Spain.  It will be a great nuisance but I shall be able to
see Algiers and Tunis and Malta in the three weeks which would have
otherwise been given to Malta alone.  And Tunis I am particularly keen
to see.  While waiting for a telegram from Spain about the boats, I
shall tell you what I have been doing.  Everybody was glad to see me
after my return from Tangier.  I dined with the Governor on Monday, in
a fine large room lined with portraits of all the old commanders and
their coats-of-arms like a little forest of flags and the Governor's
daughter danced a Spanish dance for us after it was over.  Miss Buckle,
Cust's fiancee, dances almost as well as Carmencita, all the girls here
learn it as other girls do the piano.  On Tuesday Cust and Miss B. and
another girl and I went over into Spain to see the meet and we had a
short run after a fox who went to earth, much to my relief, in about
three minutes and before I had been thrown off.  There are no fences
but the ground is one mass of rocks and cactus and ravines down which
these English go with an ease that makes me tremble  with admiration.
We had not come out to follow, so we, being quite soaked through and
very hungry, went to an inn and it was such an inn as Don Quixote used
to stop at, with the dining-room over the stable and a lot of drunken
muleteers in the court and beautiful young women to wait on us.  It is
a beautiful country Spain, with every sort of green you ever dreamed
of.  We had omelettes and native wine and black bread and got warm
again and then trotted home in the rain and got wet again, so we
stopped at the guard house on the outside of the rock and took tea with
the officer in charge and we all got down on our knees around his fire
and he hobbled around dropping his eyeglasses in his hot water and very
much honored and exceedingly embarrassed.  I amused myself by putting
on all the uniforms he did not happen to have on and the young ladies
drank tea and thawed.  This is the most various place I ever came
across.  You have mountains and seashore and allamandas like Monte
Carlo in their tropical beauty and soldiers day and night marching and
drilling and banging brass bands and tennis and guns firing so as to
rattle all the windows, and picnics and teas.  I am engaged way ahead
now but I must get off tomorrow.  On Washington's birthday I gave a
luncheon because it struck me as the most inappropriate place in which
one could celebrate the good man's memory and the Governor would not
think of coming at first, but I told him I was not a British subject
and that if I could go to his dinner he could come to my lunch, so
that, or the fact that the beautiful Miss Buckle was coming decided him
to waive etiquette and he came with his A. D. C. and his daughter and
officers and girls came and I had American flags and English flags and
a portrait of Washington and of the Queen and I ransacked the markets
for violets and banked them all up in the middle.  It was fine.  I
turned the hotel upside down and all the servants wore their best
livery and everybody stood up in a row and saluted His Excellency and I
made a speech and so did his Excellency and the chef did himself proud.
I got it up in one morning.  Helen Benedict could not have done it
better.

I had a funny adventure the morning I left Tangier-- There was a good
deal of talk about Field (confound him) and my getting into the prison
and The Herald and Times correspondents were rather blue about it and
some of the English residents said that I had not been shown the whole
of the prison, that the worst had been kept from us.  Field who only
got into the prison because I had worked at it two days, said there was
an additional ward I had not seen.  I went back into this while he and
the guard were getting the door open to go out and saw nothing, but to
make sure that the prison was as I believed an absolute square, I went
back on the morning of my departure and climbed a wall and crawled over
a house top and photographed the top of the prison.  Then a horrible
doubt came to me that this house upon which I was standing and which
adjoined the prison might be the addition of which the English
residents hinted.  There was an old woman in the garden below jumping
up and down and to whom I had been shying money to keep her quiet.  I
sent the guide around to ask her what was the nature of the building
upon which I had trespassed and which seemed to worry her so much-- He
came back to tell me that I was on the top of a harem and the old woman
thought I was getting up a flirtation with the gentleman's wives.  So I
dropped back again.

It will be a couple of months at least before my first story comes out
in The Weekly.  I cannot judge of them but I think they are up to the
average of the Western stories, the material is much richer I know, but
I am so much beset by the new sights that I have not the patience or
the leisure I had in the West-- Then there were days in which writing
was a relief, now there is so much to see that it seems almost a shame
to waste it.

By the grace of Providence I cannot leave here until the 28th, much to
my joy and I have found out that I can do better by going direct to
Malta and then to Tunis, leaving Algiers which I did not want to see
out of it-Hurrah.  I shall now return to the calm continuation of my
story and to writing notes which Chas will enjoy.

DICK.


GIBRALTAR--February 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

Morocco as it is is a very fine place spoiled by civilization.  Not
nice civilization but the dregs of it, the broken down noblemen of
Spain and cashiered captains of England and the R---- L----'s of
America.  They hunt and play cricket and gamble and do nothing to
maintain what is best in the place or to help what is worst.  I love
the Moors and the way they hate the Christian and the scorn and pride
they show.  They seem to carry all the mystery and dignity of Africa
and of foreign conquests about them, and they are wonderfully well made
and fine looking and self-respecting.  The color is very beautiful, but
the foreign element spoils it at every turn.  One should really go
inland but I shall not because I mean to do that when I reach Cairo.
Everybody goes inland from here and Bonsal has covered it already.  He
is a great man here among all classes.

I have bought two long guns and three pistols three feet long and a
Moorish costume for afternoon teas.  I shall look fine.  My guide's
idea of pleasing me is to kick everybody out of the way which always
brings down curses on me so I have to go back and give them money and
am so gradually becoming popular and much sought after by blind
beggars.  You can get three pounds of copper for a franc and it lasts
all day throwing it right and left all the time.  I made a great tear
in Bonsal's record today by refusing to pay a snake charmer all he
wanted and then when he protested I took one of the snakes out of his
hands and swung it around my head to the delight of the people.  I
wanted to show him he was a fakir to want me to pay for what I would do
myself.  It was a large snake about four feet long.  Then my horse and
another horse got fighting in the principal street in the city standing
up on their hind legs and boxing like men and biting and squealing.  It
was awful and I got mine out of the way and was trod on and had my arm
nearly pulled off and the crowd applauded and asked my guide whether I
was American or English.  They do not like the English.  So with the
lower classes I may say that I am having a social success.

DICK.


Off Malta--March 1, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

I have been having a delightful voyage with moonlight all night and
sunlight all day.  Africa kept in sight most of the time and before
that we saw beautiful mountains in Spain covered with snow and red in
the sunset.  There were a lot of nice English people going out to India
to meet their husbands and we have "tiffin" and "choota" and "curry,"
so it really seemed oriental.  The third night out we saw Algiers
sparkling like Coney Island.  I play games with myself and pretend I am
at my rooms reading a story which is very hard to pretend as I never
read in my rooms and then I look up and exclaim "Hello, I'm not in New
York, that's Algiers."  The thing that has impressed me most is how
absolutely small the world is and how childishly easy it is to go
around it.  You and Nora MUST take this trip; as for me I think Willie
Chanler is the most sensible individual I have yet met.

All the fascination of King Solomon's Mines seems to be behind those
great mountains and this I may add is a bit of advance work for mother,
an entering wedge to my disappearing from sight for years and years in
the Congo.  Which, seriously, I will not do; only it is disappointing
to find the earth so small and so easily encompassed that you want to
go on where it is older, and new.  The worst of it is that it is hard
leaving all the nice people you meet and then must say good-bye to.
The young ladies and Capt. Buckle and Cust came down to see me off and
Buckle brought me a photo four feet long of Gib, an official one which
I had to smuggle out with a great show of secrecy and now I shall be
sorry to leave these people.  Just as I wrote that one of the officers
going out to join his regiment came to the door and blushing said the
passengers were getting up a round robin asking me to stop on and go to
Cairo.

Since writing the above lots of things have happened.  I bid farewell
to everyone at Malta and yet in four hours I was back again bag and
baggage and am now on my way to Cairo.  Tunis and the Bey are
impossible.  As soon as I landed at Malta I found that though I could
go to Tunis I could not go away without being quarantined for ten days
and if I remained in Malta I must stay a week.  On balancing a week of
Egypt against a week of Malta I could not do it so I put back to this
steamer again and here I am. Tomorrow we reach Brindisi and we have
already passed Sicily and had a glimpse of the toe of Italy and it is
the coldest sunny Italy that I ever imagined.  I am bitterly
disappointed about Tunis.  I have no letters to big people in Cairo
only subalterns but I shall probably get along.  I always manage
somehow with my "artful little Ikey ways."  It was most gratifying to
mark my return to this boat.  One young woman danced a Kangaroo dance
and the Captain wept and all the stewards stood in a line and grinned.
I sing Chevalier's songs and they all sit in the dining room below and
forget to lay out the plates and last night some of the Royal Berkshire
with whom I dined at Malta came on board and after hearing the Old Kent
Road were on the point of Mutiny and refused to return to barracks.
Great is the Power of Chevalier and great is his power for taking you
back to London with three opening bars.  Malta was the queerest place I
ever got into.  It was like a city, country and island made of cheese,
mouldy cheese, and fresh limburger cheese with holes in it.  You sailed
right up to the front door as it were and people were hanging out of
the windows smoking pipes and looking down on the deck as complacently
as though having an ocean steamer in the yard was as much a matter of
course as a perambulator.  There were also women with black hoods which
they wear as a penance because long ago the ladies of Malta got
themselves talked about.  I was on shore about five hours and saw some
interesting things and with that and Brindisi and the voyage I can make
a third letter but Tunis is writ on my heart like Calais.

Today Cleveland is inaugurated and I took all the passengers down at
the proper time and explained to them that at that moment a great man
was being made president and gave them each an American cocktail to
remember it by and in which to toast him I am getting to be a great
speech maker and if there are any more anniversaries in America I shall
be a second Depew.

It is late but it is still the season here and it will be gay, but what
I want to do now is to go off on a little trip inland although Cairo is
the worst of all for it is surrounded by deserts and nothing to shoot
but antelope and foxes and those I SCORN.  I want Zulus and lions.  I
shall be greatly disappointed if I do not have something to do outside
of Cairo for I have had no adventures at all.  It is just as civilized
as Camden only more exciting and beautiful although Camden is exciting
when you have to get there and back in time for the last edition.  From
what I have already seen I am ready to spend a month in Cairo and then
confess to knowing nothing of it.  But we shall see.  There may be a W
A R or a lion hunt or something yet if there is not I shall come back
here again.  I must fire that Winchester off at least once just for all
the trouble it has given me at custom houses.  Something exciting must
happen or I shall lose faith in the luck of the British army which
marches shoulder to shoulder with mine.  If I don't have any adventures
I shall write essays on art after this like Mrs. Van.  Love and lots of
it.

DICK.


CAIRO, March 11, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

In a famous book this line occurs, "He determined to go to that hotel
in Cairo where they were to have spent their honeymoon," or words like
that.  He is now at that hotel and you can buy the famous book across
the street.  It is called "Gallegher."  So--in this way everything
comes to him who waits and he comes to it.  "Gallegher" is not the only
thing you buy in Egypt.  You ride to the Pyramids on a brake with a man
in a white felt hat blowing a horn, and the bugler of the Army of
Occupation is as much in evidence as the priest who calls them to
prayer from the minaret.  I left the people I liked on the Sultey last
Thursday in the Suez Canal and came on here in a special train.  It is
very cold here, and it is not a place where the cold is in keeping with
the surroundings.  You see people in white helmets and astrakan
overcoats.  It is an immense city and intensely interesting, especially
the bazaars, but you feel so ignorant about it all that it rather
angers you.  I wish I was not such a very bad hand at languages.  That
is ONE THING I cannot do, that and ride.  I need it very much,
traveling so much, and I shall study very hard while I am in Paris.
Our consul-general here is a very young man, and he showed me a Kansas
paper when I called on him, which said that I was in the East and would
probably call on "Ed" L.  He is very civil to me and gives me his
carriages and outriders with gold clothes and swords whenever I will
take them.

It is so beastly cold here that it spoils a lot of things, and there
are a lot of Americans who say, "I had no idea you were so young a
man," and that, after being five years old for a month and playing
children's games with English people who didn't know or care anything
about you except that you made them laugh, is rather trying.  I am
disappointed so far in the trip because it has developed nothing new
beyond the fact that going around the world is of no more importance
than going to breakfast, and I am selfish in my sightseeing and want to
see things others do not.  And if you even do see more than those who
are not so fortunate and who have to remain at home, still you are so
ignorant in comparison with those who have lived here for years and to
whom the whole of Africa is a speculation in land or railroads, it
makes you feel like such a faker and as if it were better to turn
correspondent for the N. Y. Herald, Paris edition, and send back the
names of those who are staying at the hotels.  That is really all you
can speak with authority about.  When you have Gordon and Stanley
dishes on the bill-of-fare, you feel ashamed to say you've been in
Egypt.  Anyway, I am a faker and I don't care, and I proved it today by
being photographed on a camel in front of the Pyramids, and if that
wasn't impertinence I do not know its name.  I accordingly went and
bought a lot of gold dresses for Nora as a penance.

As a matter of fact, unless I get into the interior for a month and see
something new, I shall consider the trip a failure, except as a most
amusing holiday for one, and that was not exactly what I wanted or all
I wanted.  After this I shall go to big cities only and stay there.
Everybody travels and everybody sees as much as you do and says nothing
of it, certainly does not presume to write a book about it.  Anyway, it
has been great fun, so I shall put it down to that and do some serious
work to make up for it.  I'd rather have written a good story about the
Inauguration than about Cairo.

I am well, as usual, and having a fine loaf, only I don't think much of
what I have written--that's all.

DICK.


CAIRO, March 19th, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

I went up the Pyramids yesterday and I am very sore today.  It sounds
easy because so many people do it, but they do it because they don't
know.  I have been putting it off, and putting it off, until I felt
ashamed to such a degree that I had to go.  Little had never been
either, so we went out together and met Stanford White and the Emmetts
there, and we all went up.  I would rather go into Central Africa than
do it again.  I am getting fat and that's about it--and I had to half
pull a much fatter man than myself who pretended to help me.  I finally
told them I'd go alone unless the fat man went away, so the other two
drove him off.  Going down is worse.  It's like looking over a
precipice all the time.  I was so glad when I got down that I sang with
glee.  I hate work like that, and to make it worse I took everybody's
picture on top of the Pyramid, and forgot to have one of them take me,
so there is no way to prove I ever went up.  Little and I hired two
donkeys and called them "Gallegher" and "Van Bibber" and raced them.
My donkey was so little that they couldn't see him--only his ears.
Gallegher won.  The donkey-boys called it Von Bebey, so I don't think
it will help the sale of the book.

Today we went to call on the Khedive.  It was very informal and too
democratic to suit my tastes.  We went through a line of his bodyguard
in the hall, and the master of ceremonies took us up several low but
wide stairways to a hall.  In the hall was a little fat young man in a
frock coat and a fez, and he shook hands with us, and walked into
another room and we all sat down on chairs covered with white muslin.
I talked and Little talked about me and the Khedive pretended to be
very much honored, and said the American who had come over after our
rebellion had done more for the officers in his army than had anyone
else, meaning the English.  He did not say that because we were
Americans, but because he hates the English.  He struck me as being
stubborn, which is one side of stupidness and yet not stupid, and I
occasionally woke him to bursts of enthusiasm over the Soudanese.  His
bursts were chiefly "Ali."  Little seemed to amuse him very much, and
Little treated him exactly like a little boy who needed to be cheered
up.  I think in one way it was the most curious contrast I ever saw.
"Ed" Little of Abilene, Kansas, telling the ruler of Egypt not to
worry, that he had plenty of years in which to live and that he would
get ahead of them all yet.  Those were not his words, but that was the
tone, he was perfectly friendly and sincere about it.

This place appeals to me as about the best place with which to get
mixed up with that I know, and I've gone over a great many maps since I
left home and know just how small the world is.  So, I sent the Khedive
my books after having asked his permission, and received the most
abject thanks.  And as Cromer called on me, I am going to drop around
on him with a few of them.  Some day there will be fine things going on
here, and there is only one God, and Lord Cromer is his Prophet in this
country.  They think that Mohammed is but they are wrong.  He is a very
big man.  The day he sent his ultimatum to the Khedive telling him to
dismiss Facta Pasha and put back Riaz Pasha, he went out in full view
of the Gezerik drive and played lawn tennis.  Any man who can cable for
three thousand more troops to Malta and stop a transport full of two
thousand more at Aden with one hand, and bang tennis balls about with
the other, is going in the long run to get ahead of a stout little boy
in a red fez.  It is getting awfully hot here, almost hot enough for
me, and I can lay aside my overcoat by ten o'clock in the morning.
Everyone else has been in flannels and pith helmets, but as they had to
wear overcoats at night I could not see the advantage of the costume.

DICK.


I open this to say that ALL of your letters have just come, so I have
intoxicated myself with them for the last hour and can go over them
again tomorrow.  I cannot tell you, dearest, what a delight your
letters are and how I enjoy the clippings.  I think of you all the time
and how you would love this Bible land and seeing the places where
Pharaoh's daughter found Moses, and hearing people talk of St. Paul and
the plagues of Egypt and Joseph and Mary just as though they had lived
yesterday.  I have seen two St. Johns already, with long hair and
melancholy wild eyes and bare breasts and legs, with sheepskin
covering, eating figs and preaching their gospel.  Yesterday two men
came running into town and told one of the priests that they had seen
the new moon in a certain well, and the priest proclaimed a month of
fasting, and the men who pulled us up the Pyramid had to rest because
they had not eaten or drunk all day.  At six a sheik called from the
village and all the donkey--boys and guides around the Sphinx ran to
get water and coffee and food.  Think of that--of two men running
through the street to say that they had seen the new moon in a well,
when every shop sells Waterbury watches and the people who passed them
were driving dogcarts with English coachmen in top-boots behind.  Is
there any other place as incongruous as this, as old and as new?

DICK.


ATHENS, March 30, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

I am now in Athens, how I got here is immaterial.  Suffice it to say
that never in all my life was I so ill as I was in the two days
crossing from Alexandria to Piraeus, which I did with two other men in
the same cabin more ill than I and praying and swearing and groaning
all the time.  "It was awful."


     "I have crossed in many ships upon the seas
          And some of them were good and some were not;
          In German, P & O's and Genoese,
          But the Khedive's was the worst one of the lot.
          We never got a moment's peace in her
          For everybody'd howl or pray or bellow;
          She threw us on our heads or on our knees,
          And turned us all an unbecoming yellow."


Athens is a small town but fine.  It is chiefly yellow houses with red
roofs, and mountains around it, which remind you of pictures you have
seen when a youth.  Also olive trees and straight black pines and the
Acropolis.  There is not much of it left as far as I can see from the
city, but what there is is enough to make you wish you had brushed up
your Greek history.  I have now reached the place where Pan has a cave,
where the man voted against Aristides because he was humanly tired of
hearing him called the Just and where the Minotaur ate young women.

What was in the Isle of Crete but the rock from which the father of
Theseus threw himself--is still here!  Also the hill upon which Paul
stood and told the Athenians they were too superstitious.  You can
imagine my feelings at finding all of these things are true.  After
this I am going to the North Pole to find Santa Claus and so renew my
youth.

I regret to say that it is raining very hard and Athens is not set for
a rainstorm.  It is also cold but as I have not been warm since I
crossed the North River with Chas. amid cakes of ice that is of no
consequence.  When I come here again I come in the summer.  The good
old rule that it is cold in winter and warm in summer is a good enough
rule to follow.  You have only to travel to find out how universally
cold winter is.  last night I was in Cairo, I got in a carriage and
drove out alone to the Pyramids.  It was beautiful moonlight.  I got a
donkey and rode up around them and then walked over to the Sphinx.  I
had never understood or seen it before.  It was the creepiest and most
impressive thing I ever had happen to me, I do believe.  There was no
one except the two donkey-boys and myself and the Sphinx.  All about
was the desert and above it the purple sky and the white stars and the
great negro's head in front of you with its paws stretched out, and the
moonlight turning it into shadows and white lines.  I think I stood
there so long that I got sort of dizzy.  It was just as if I had been
the first man to stumble across it, and I felt that I was way back
thousands of years and that the ghosts of Caesar and Napoleon and
Cleopatra and the rest were in the air.  That was worth the entire trip
to me.  This place promises to be most exciting, the New York artists
are all here, they are the most jauntily dull people I ever met.  Do
you know what I mean?  They are very nice but so stupid.  I don't let
them bother me.  Who was the chap who wrote about the bottle of
Malvoisie? because I got a bottle of it for BREAKFAST and it is NO
GOOD.  It is like sweet port.  But on account of the poem and its being
vin du pays I got it.

Dear Mother, I wish you were here now and enjoying all these beautiful
things.  I got you a present in Cairo that will amuse you.  Had I
stayed on in Cairo I should have had much and many marks of distinction
from the English.  Lady Gower-Browne, who found out from them that I
had called and that they had done nothing except to be rude, raised a
great hue and cry and everything changed.  What she said of me I don't
know but it made a most amusing difference.  General Walker galloped a
half mile across the desert to give me his own copy of the directions
for the sham battle, and I was to have met Cromer at dinner
tete-a-tete, and General Kitchener sent apologies by two other generals
and all the subalterns called on me in a body.  That was the day before
I left.  I don't know what Lady Gower-Browne said, but it made a change
which I am sorry I could not avail myself of as I want politics as well
as memories.

The next time I come I shall go to even fewer places and see more
people.

If the Harpers don't look out our interests will clash.  I look at it
like this.  I can always see the old historical things and take my
children up the Nile, but I want now to make friends with the Mammon of
unrighteousness and the men of the hour.  I may want to occupy an hour
or two myself some day and they can help me.  If America starts in
annexing islands she will need people to tell her how it is generally
done and it is generally done, I find, by the English.  I may give up
literature and start annexing things like Alexander and Caesar and
Napoleon.  They say there will be another crisis in Cairo in a month or
so.  If that be true I am all right and solid with both parties.  But
it has got to be worth while of course or I won't go back.  There is a
king living in a fine palace across the square from my window, one of
his officers is now changing the guard in the rain.  I hope to call on
the king because I like his guard.  They wear petticoats and toes
turned up in front.  Don't you mind what I say about liking politics
and don't think I am not enjoying the show things.  I have a capacity
for both that is so far unsatisfied, and I am now going out in the rain
to try and find the post-office.  Lots of love.

                                             DICK.

I am well and have been well (except sea sick) since February

P. S.--A funeral is just passing the window with the corpse exposed to
view as is the quaint custom here, to add to its horror they rouge the
face of the corpse and everybody kisses it.  In the Greek church they
burn candles for people and the number of candles I have burnt for you
would light St. Paul's, and you ought to be good with so much war being
expended all over Athens for you.  You buy candles instead of tipping
the verger or putting it in the poor box, or because you are
superstitious and think it will do some good, as I do.


Orient Express.  Somewhere in Bulgaria on the way to London.

April 14th, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

Tuesday I wrote you a letter in the club at Constantinople telling you
how glad I would be to get out of that City on April 17th on the Orient
Express which only leaves twice a week on Thursdays and Mondays.  So
any one who travels by the Orient is looked upon first as a millionaire
and second, if he does not break the journey at Vienna, as a greater
traveller than Col. Burnaby on his way to Khiva.  Imagine a Kansas City
man breaking the journey to New York.  After I wrote you that letter I
went in the next room and read of the Nile Expedition in search of
Gordon--this went through three volumes of The Graphic and took some
time, so that when I had reached the picture which announced the death
of Gordon it was half past five and I had nothing more to do for four
days-- It was raining and cold and muddy and so I just made up my mind
I would get up and get out and I jumped about for one hour like a
kangaroo and by seven I was on the Orient with two Cook men to help me
and had shaken my fist at the last minaret light of that awful city.
So, now it is all over and it is done-- I have learned a great deal in
an imperfect way of the juxtaposition of certain countries and of the
ease with which one can travel without speaking any known languages and
of the absolute necessity for speaking one, French.  I am still
disappointed about the articles but selfishly I have made a lot out of
the trip.  You have no idea how hard it is not to tell about strange
things and yet you know people do not care half as much for them as
things they know all about-- No matter, it is done and with the
exception of the last week it was F I N E.


"I'm going back to London, to 'tea' and long frock coats
     I'm done with Cook and seeing sights
     I'm done with table d'hotes
     So clear the track you signal man
     From Sofia to Pless, I'm going straight for London
     On the Orient Express.

I'm going straight for London O'er Bulgaria's heavy sands To Rotten Row
and muffins, soles, Chevalier and Brass Bands Ho' get away you bullock
man You've heard the whistle blowed a locomotive coming down the Grand
Trunk Road."


This is a great country and I want to ask all the natives if they know
"Stenie" Bonsal.  They are all his friends and so are the "Balkans,"
and all the little Balkans.  Nobody wears European clothes here.  They
are all as foreign and native and picturesque as they can be, the women
with big silver plates over their stomachs and the men in sheepskin and
tights and the soldiers are grand.  We have been passing all day
between snow covered mountains and between herds of cattle and red
roofed, mud villages and long lakes of ice and snow-- It is a beautiful
day and I am very happy. (Second day out) 15th---We are now in Hungary
and just outside of Buda Pesth "the wickedest city in the world," still
in spite of that fact I am going on.  I am very glad I came this way--
The peasants and soldiers are most amusing and like German
picture-papers with black letter type-- I shall stop a day in Paris now
that I have four extra days.

DICK.


In sight of Paris--April 16, 1893.

DEAREST MOTHER:

has been the most beautiful day since February 4th.  It is the first
day in which I have been warm.  All through I have had a varnish of
warmth every now and again but no real actual internal warmth--I am now
in sight of Paris and it is the 16th of April, in the eleven weeks
which have elapsed since the 4th of February I have been in Spain,
France, Italy, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Serbia, Bulgaria, Turkey,
Greece, Egypt and Morocco.  I have sat on the Rock of Gibraltar, sailed
on the Nile and the Suez Canal and crossed through the Dardanelles,
over the Balkans, the steppes of Hungary and the Danube and Rhine.  I
have seen the sphinx by moonlight, the Parthenon and the Eiffel Tower
and in two days more I shall have seen St. Paul's.  What do you think I
should like to see best now?  YOU.  I have been worrying of late as to
whether or not I should not come home now and leave Paris for another
time because it seems so rough on you to leave you without either of
your younger sons for so long.  But I have thought it over a great deal
and I think it better that I should do Paris now and leave myself clear
for the rest of the year.  I promise you one thing however that I shall
not undertake to stay away so long again; it is too long and one grows
out of things.  But nothing I feel, will be so easy or so amusing as
Paris and I intend to get through with it soon and trot home to you by
the middle of August AT THE VERY LATEST.  So, please write me a
deceitful letter and say you do not miss me at all and that my being so
near as Paris makes a great difference and that I am better out of the
way and if Chas goes to London I shall be near him in case he forgets
to put on his overshoes or involves us in a war with G. B.  Now, mother
dear, do write me a cheerful letter and say that you do not mind
waiting until the middle of August for me and when I come back this
time I shall make a long stay with you at Marion and tell you lots of
things I have not written you and I shall not go away again for ever so
long and if I do go I shall only stay a little while.  You have no idea
how interesting this rush across the continent has been.  I started in
snow and through marshes covered with ice and long horned cattle and
now we are in such a beautiful clean green land with green fields and
green trees and flowering bushes which you can smell as the train goes
by.  I now think that instead of being a cafe-chantant singer I should
rather be an Austrian baron and own a castle on a hill with a red
roofed village around it.  I have spent almost all of the trip sitting
on the platform and enjoying the sight of the queer peasants and the
soldiers and old villages.  Tonight I shall be in "Paris, France" as
Morton used to say and I shall get clean and put on my dress clothes
but whether I shall go see Yvette Guilbert or Rusticana again I do not
know.  Perhaps I shall just paddle around the fountain in the Place de
la Concorde and make myself thoroughly at home.  With a great deal of
love to Dad and Nora and Chas and all.

DICK.


At the time that Richard's first travel articles appeared some of his
critics took umbrage at the fact that he was evidently under the
delusion that he had discovered London, Gibraltar, Athens, Paris, and
the other cities he had visited, and that no one else had ever written
about them.  As a matter of fact no one could have been more keenly
conscious of what an oft-told tale were the places that he had chosen
to describe.  If Richard took it for granted that the reader was
totally unacquainted with the peoples of these cities and their ways,
it was because he believed that that was the best way to write a
descriptive article, always had believed it, and believed it so long as
he wrote.  And whatever difference of opinion may have existed among
the critics and the public as to Richard's fiction, I think it is safe
to say that as a reporter his work of nearly thirty years stood at
least as high as that of any of his contemporaries or perhaps as that
of the reporters of all time.  As an editor, when he gave out an
assignment to a reporter to write an article on some well-worn subject
and the reporter protested, Richard's answer was the same:  "You must
always remember that that story hasn't been written until YOU write
it."  And when he suggested to an editor that he would like to write an
article on Broadway, or the Panama Canal, or the ruins of Rome and the
editor disapproved, Richard's argument was:  "It hasn't been done until
_I_ do it."  And it was not because he believed for a moment that he
could do it better or as well as it had been done.  It was simply
because he knew the old story was always a good story, that is, if it
was seen with new eyes and from a new standpoint.  At twenty-eight he
had written a book about England and her people, and the book had met
with much success both in America and England.  At twenty-nine, equally
unafraid, he had "covered" the ancient cities that border the
Mediterranean, and now Paris lay before him!  This thought--indeed few
thoughts--troubled Richard very much in those days of his early
successes.  He had youth, friends, a marvellous spirit of adventure,
and besides there are many worse fates than being consigned to spending
a few months in Paris, having a thoroughly joyous time, taking a few
mental notes, and a little later on transferring them to paper in the
quiet of a peaceful summer home at Marion.

Chief among his friends in Paris at this time was Charles Dana Gibson,
who was living in a charming old house in the Latin Quarter, and where
the artist did some of his best work and made himself extremely popular
with both the Parisians and the American colony.  In addition to Gibson
there were Kenneth Frazier, the portrait-painter, and Tina, Newton, and
James Eustis, the daughter and sons of James B. Eustis, who at that
time was our ambassador to France, a most genial and kindly host, who
made much of Richard and his young friends.


PARIS, May 5, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

It is a narrow street with apartment houses of gray stone and iron
balconies along either side of it.  The sun sets at one end of the
street at different times during the day and we all lean out on the
balconies to look.  On the house, one below mine, on the other side of
our street, is a square sign that says:

ALFRED DE MUSSET

EST MORT DANS CETTE MAISON


A great many beautiful ladies with the fashionable red shade of hair
still call there, as they used to do when the proper color was black
and it was worn in a chignon and the Second Empire had but just begun.
While they wait they stretch out in their carriages and gaze up at the
balconies until they see me, and as I wear a gold and pink silk wrapper
and not much else, they concentrate all their attention on the wrapper
and forget to drop a sigh for the poet.  There are two young people on
the sixth floor opposite, who come out on the balcony after dinner and
hold on to each other and he tells her all about the work of the day.
Below there is a woman who sews nothing but black dresses, and who does
that all day and all night by the light of a lamp.  And below the
concierge stands all day in a lace cap and black gown and blue, and
looks up the street and down the street like the woman in front of
Hockley's.  BUT on the floor opposite mine there is a beautiful lady in
a pink and white wrapper with long black hair and sleepy black eyes.
She does not take any interest in my pink wrapper, but contents herself
with passing cabs and stray dogs and women with loaves of bread and
bottles in their hands who occasionally stray into our street.  At six
she appears in another gown and little slippers and a butterfly for a
hat and says "Good-by" to the old concierge and trips off to dinner.
Lots of love to all.

DICK.


PARIS, May 11th, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

I am still somewhat tentative as regards my opinion of the place, what
it will bring me in the way of material I cannot tell.  So far, "Paris
Decadent" would be a good title for anything I should write of it.  It
is not that I have seen only the worst side of it but that that seems
to be so much the most prominent.  They worship the hideous Eiffel
Tower and they are a useless, flippant people who never sleep and yet
do nothing while awake.  To-morrow I am going to a pretty inn
surrounded by vines and trees to see a prize fight with all the silly
young French men and their young friends in black and white who ape the
English manners and customs even to "la box."  To night at the
Ambassadeurs the rejected lover of some actress took a gang of bullies
from Montmartre there and hissed and stoned her.  I turned up most
innocently and greatly bored in the midst of it but I was too far away
to pound anybody-- I collected two Englishmen and we went in front to
await her re-appearance but she had hysterics and went off in a cab and
so we were not given a second opportunity of showing them they should
play fair.  It is a typical incident of the Frenchman and has made me
wrathy.  The women watching the prize fight will make a good story and
so will the arms of the red mill, "The Moulin Rouge" they keep turning
and turning and grinding out health and virtue and souls.

I dined to night with the C-----s and P----s, the Ex-Minister and
disagreed with everybody and found them all very middle class as to
intellect.  An old English lady next to me said apropos of something
"that is because you are not clever like Mr. ---- and do not have to
work with your brains."  To which I said, I did not mind not being
clever as my father was a many times millionaire," at which she became
abjectly polite.  Young Rothenstein is going to do a picture of me
to-morrow morning.  There is nothing much more to tell except that a
horse stood on his fore legs in the Bois the other day and chucked me
into space.  I was very sore but I went on going about as it was the
Varnishing day at the new salon and I wished to see it.  I am over my
stiffness now and if "anybody wants to buy a blooming bus" I have one
for sale and five pairs of riding breeches and two of ditto boots.  No
more riding for me--- The boxing bag is in good order now and I do not
need for exercise.  The lady across the street has a new wrapper in
which she is even more cold and haughty than before.  "I sing Tarrara
boom deay and she keeps from liking me."

DICK.


PARIS, May 14th, 1893.

DEAR NORA:

Things are getting more interesting here and I shall probably have
something to write about after all, although I shall not know the place
as I did London.  Will Rothenstein has drawn a picture of me that I
like very much and if mother likes it VERY, VERY much she may have it
as a loan but she may not like it.  I did not like to take it so I
bought another picture of him, one of Coquelin cadet and now I have
two.  Coquelin gave him his first commission when he was nineteen, two
years ago, and then asked him to do two sketches.  After these were
done Coquelin told him by letter that he would give him half what they
had agreed upon for the big picture for the two sketches and begged the
big picture as a gift.  So Rothenstein cut the head and shoulders out
of the big one and sent him the arms and legs.  It is the head he cut
out that I have.  When Rothenstein and I and Coquelin become famous,
that will make a good story.  I have also indulged myself in the
purchase of several of Cherets works of art.  They cost three francs
apiece.  We have had some delightful lunches at the Ambassadeurs with
Cushing and other artists and last night I went out into the Grande
Monde to a bal masque for charity at the palace of the Comtesse de la
Ferrondeux.  It was very stupid and the men outnumbered the women 30 to
1, which are interesting odds.  To-day we went to Whistler's and sat
out in a garden with high walls about it and drank tea and laughed at
Rothenstein.  The last thing he said was at the Ambassadeurs when one
of the students picking up a fork said, "These are the same sort of
forks I have."  Rothenstein said "yes, I did not know you dined here
that often."  Some one asked him why he wore his hair long, "To test
your manners" he answered.  He is a disciple of Whistler's and Wilde's
and said "yes, I defend them at the risk of their lives."  Did I tell
you of his saying "It is much easier to love one's family than to like
them."  And when some one said "Did you hear how Mrs. B.  treated Mr.
C., (a man he dislikes) he said, "no, but I'm glad she did."  It was
lovely at Whistler's and such a contrast to the other American salon I
went to last Sunday.  It was so quiet, and green and pretty and
everybody was so unobtrusively polite.

Rothenstein wore my rosette and made a great sensation and I was
congratulated by Whistler and Abbey and Pennell.  Rothenstein said he
was going to have a doublebreasted waistcoat made with rosettes of
decorations for buttons.  Tomorrow Lord Dufferin has asked me to
breakfast at the Embassy.  He was at the masked ball last night and was
very nice.  He reminds me exactly of Disraeli in appearance.  It is
awfully hot here and a Fair for charity has asked me to put my name in
"Gallegher" to have it raffled for.  "Dear" Bonsal arrives here next
Sunday, so I am in great anticipation.  I am very well, tell mother,
and amused.  Lots of love.

DICK.


PARIS, June 13, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

There is nothing much to say except that things still go on.  I feel
like one of those little India rubber balls in the jet of a fountain
being turned and twisted and not allowed to rest.  Today I have been to
hear Yvette Guilbert rehearse and thought her all Chas thinks her only
her songs this season are beneath the morals of a medical student.  It
is very hot and it is getting hotter.  I had an amusing time at the
Grand Prix where Tina won a lot of money on a tip I gave her which I
did not back myself.  In the evening Newton took me to dinner and to
the Jardin de Paris where they had 10 franc admittance and where every
thing went that wasn't nailed.  The dudes put candles on their high
hats and the girls snuffed them out with kicks and at one time the
crowd mobbed the band stand and then the stage and played on all the
instruments.  The men were all swells in evening dress and the women in
beautiful ball dresses and it was a wonderful sight.  It only happens
once a year like the Yale-Princeton night at Koster and Bials except
that the women are all very fine indeed.  They rode pig-a-back races
and sang all the songs.  I had dinner with John Drew last night.  I
occasionally sleep and if Nora doesn't come on time I shall be a
skeleton and have no money left.  As a matter of fact I am fatter than
ever and can eat all sorts of impossible things here that I could never
eat at home.  I lunch every day with the Eustises and we dine out
almost every night.  I consort entirely with the poorest of art
students or the noblest of princesses and so far have kept out of
mischief, but you can never tell for this is a wicked city they say, or
it strikes me as most amusing at present only I cannot see what Harper
and Bros. are going to get out of it.  I said that of London so I
suppose it will all straighten out by the time I get back.

DICK.




CHAPTER VII

FIRST PLAYS

When the season in Paris had reached its end, Richard returned to
London and later on to Marion, where he spent the late summer and early
fall, working on his Mediterranean and Paris articles, and completing
his novel "Soldiers of Fortune."  In October he returned to New York
and once more assumed his editorial duties and took his usual active
interest in the winter's gayeties.

The first of these letters refers to a dinner of welcome given to Sir
Henry Irving.  The last two to books by my mother and Richard, and
which were published simultaneously.


NEW YORK, November 27, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

The dinner was very fine.  I was very glad I went.  Whitelaw Reid sat
on one side of Sir Henry Irving and Horace Porter on the other.
Howells and Warner came next.  John Russell Young and Mark Twain,
Millet, Palmer, Hutton, Gilder and a lot more were there.  There were
no newspaper men, not even critics nor actors there, which struck me as
interesting.  The men were very nice to me.  Especially Young, Reid,
Irving and Howells.  Everybody said when I came in, "I used to know you
when you were a little boy," so that some one said finally, "What a
disagreeable little boy you MUST have been." I sat next a chap from
Brazil who told me lots of amusing things.  One story if it is good
saves a whole day for me.  One he told was of a German explorer to whom
Don Pedro gave an audience.  The Emperor asked him, with some touch of
patronage, if he had ever met a king before.  "Yes," the German said
thoughtfully; "five, three wild and two tame."

Mark Twain told some very funny stories, and captured me because I
never thought him funny before, and Irving told some about Stanley, and
everybody talked interestingly.  Irving said he was looking forward to
seeing Dad when he reached Philadelphia.  "It is nice to have seen
you," he said, "but I have still to see your father," as though I was
not enough.  DICK.


NEW YORK, 1893.

DEAREST MOTHER:

I cannot tell you how touched and moved I was by the three initials in
the book.  It was a genuine and complete surprise and when I came
across it while I was examining the letterpress with critical
approbation and with no idea of what was to come, it left me quite
breathless-- It was so sweet of you-- You understand me and I
understand you and you know how much that counts to me-- I think the
book is awfully pretty and in such good taste-- It is quite a delight
to the eye and I am much more keen about it than over any of my own-- I
have sent it to some of my friends but I have not read it yet myself,
as I am waiting until I get on the boat where I shall not be
disturbed-- Then I shall write you again-- It was awfully good of you,
and I am so pleased to have it to give away.  I never had anything to
show people when they asked for one of your other books and this comes
in such an unquestionable form-- With lots of love.

DICK.


NEW YORK, 1893.

DEAR MOTHER:

I got your nice letter and one from Dad.  Both calling me many
adjectives pleasing to hear although they do not happen to fit.  So you
are in a third edition are you?  These YOUNG writers are crowding me to
the wall.  I feel thrills of pride when I see us sitting cheek by jowl
on the news-stands.  Lots of love.




In February, 1894, Richard was forced by a severe attack of sciatica to
give up temporarily the gayeties of New York and for a cure he
naturally chose our home in Philadelphia, where he remained for many
weeks.  Although unable to leave his bed, he continued to do a
considerable amount of work, including the novelette "The Princess
Aline," in the writing of which I believe my brother took more pleasure
than in that of any story or novel he ever wrote.  The future Empress
of Russia was the heroine of the tale, and that she eventually read the
story and was apparently delighted with it caused Richard much human
happiness.


PHILADELPHIA.

March 5th.

DEAR CHAS:

I am getting rapidly better owing to regular hours and light literature
and home comforts.  I am not blue as I was and my morbidness has gone
and I only get depressed at times.  I am still however feeling tired
and I think I will take quite a rest before I venture across the seas.
But across them I will come no matter if all the nerves on earth jump
and pull.  Still, I think it wiser for all concerned that I get
thoroughly well so that when I do come I won't have to be cutting back
home again as I did last time.  We are young yet and the world's wide
and there's a new farce comedy written every minute and I have a great
many things to do myself so I intend to get strong and then do them.  I
enclose two poems.  I am going to have them printed for my particular
pals later.  I am writing one to all of you folks over there.

DICK.


TAKE ME BACK TO BROADWAY, WHERE THE ORCHIDS GROW

WITH APOLOGIES TO THE WESTERN DIALECT POETS

  "I have wandered up and down somewhat in many different lands
  I have been to Fort Worth, Texas, and I've tramped
      through Jersey sands,
  I have seen Pike's Peak by Moonlight, and I've visited the Fair
  And to save enumeration I've been nearly everywhere.
      But no matter where
  I rested and no matter where I'd go, I have longed to be
      on Broadway

                    Where
                         the
                              Orchids
                                   Grow.

  Some people love the lilies fair that hide in mossy dells
  Some folks are fond of new mown hay, before the rainy spells
  But give to me the orchids rare that hang in Thorley's store,
  And in Fleischman's at the Hoffman, and in half a dozen more
  And when I see them far from home they make my heart's blood glow
    For they take me back to Broadway

                    Where
                         the
                              Orchids
                                   Grow.

  Let Paris boast of boulevards where one can sit and drink
  There is no such chance on Broadway, at the Brower House,
       'I don't think.'
  And where else are there fair soubrettes in pipe clayed tennis shoes,
  And boys in silken sashes promenading by in twos
  Oh you can boast of any street of which you're proud to know
  But give me sleepy Broadway

                    Where
                         the
                              Orchids
                                   Grow.

  Let poets sing of chiming bells and gently lowing kine
  I like the clanging cable cars like fire engines in line
  And I never miss the sunset and for moonlight never sigh
  When 'Swept by Ocean Breezes.' flashes out against the sky.
  And when the Tenderloin awakes, and open theatres glow
  I want to be on Broadway

               Where
                    the
                         Orchids
                              Grow."


A VOUS, JOHN DREW

  "John Drew, I am your debtor
  For a very pleasant letter
  And a lot of cabinet photos
  Of the 'Butterflies' and you
  And I think it very kind
  That you kept me so in mind
  And pitied me in exile
  So I do, John Drew.


2


  John Drew, 'twixt you and me
  Precious little I can see
  Of that good there is in Solitude
  That poets say they view.
  For _I_ hate to be in bed
  With a candle at my head
  Sitting vis a vis with Conscience.
  So would you, John Drew.

3


  John Drew, then promise me
  That as soon as I am free
  I may sit in the first entrance
  As Lamb always lets me do.
  And watch you fume and fret
  While the innocent soubrette
  Takes the centre of the stage a--
  Way from you, John Drew."

R. H. D.


In the summer of 1894 Richard went to London for a purely social visit,
but while he was there President Carnot was assassinated, and he went
to Paris to write the "story" of the funeral and of the election of the
new President.

VERSAILLES, June 24, 1894.

I am out here to see the election of the new President.  I jumped on
the mail coach and came off in a hurry without any breakfast, but I had
a pretty drive out, and the guard and I talked of London.  The palace
is closed and no one is admitted except by card, so I have seen only
the outside of it.  It is most interesting.  There is not a ribbon or a
badge; not a banner or a band.  The town is as quiet as always, and
there are not 200 people gathered at the gate through which the
deputies pass.  Compared to an election convention in Chicago, it is
most interesting.  How lively it is inside of the chamber where the
thing is going on I cannot say.  I shall not wait to hear the result,
but will return on the coach.

Nothing could be more curious than the apparent indifference of the
people of Paris to the assassination of the President.  Two days after
he died there was not a single flag at half mast among the private
residences.  The Government buildings, the hotels and the stores were
all that advertised their grief.  I shall have an interesting story to
write of it for the Parisian series.  Dana Gibson and I will wait until
after the funeral and then go to Andorra.  If he does not go, I may go
alone, but perhaps I shall go back to London at once.  This has been an
interesting time here, but only because it is so different from what
one would expect.  It reads like a burlesque to note the expressions of
condolence from all over the world, and to mark the self-satisfaction
of the French at attracting so much sympathy, and their absolute
indifference to the death of Carnot.  It is most curious.  We have an
ideal time.  Never before have I had such jolly dinners, with such good
talk and such amusing companions.

DICK.


LONDON, July 15, 1894.

DEAR MOTHER:

Mr. Irving gave a supper last night to Mme. Bernhardt and Mme.  Rejane.
There were about twenty people, and we ate in the Beefsteak Room of the
Lyceum Theater, which is so called after the old Beefsteak Club which
formerly met there.  I had a most delightful time, and talked to all
the French women and to Miss Terry, who sent her love to Dad.  She
said, "I did not SEE him this last visit; that is, I saw him but I did
not see him."  Her daughter is a very sweet girl, and the picture Miss
Terry made on her knees looking up at Bernhardt and Rejane when they
chattered in French was wonderful.  Neither she nor Irving could speak
a word of French, and whenever any one else tried, the crowd all stood
in a circle and applauded and guyed them.  After it was over, at about
three in the morning, Miss Terry offered me a lift home in her open
carriage, so she and her daughter and I rode through the empty streets
in the gray light for miles and miles, as, of course, I did not get out
of such company any sooner than I had to do.  They had taken Irving's
robe of cardinal red and made it into cloaks, and they looked very odd
and eerie with their yellow hair and red capes, and talking as fast as
they could.

DICK.




CHAPTER VIII

CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA

About January 1, 1895, Richard accompanied by his friends Somers
Somerset and Lloyd C. Griscom, afterward our minister to Tokio and
ambassador to Brazil and Italy, started out on a leisurely trip of
South and Central America.  With no very definite itinerary, they
sailed from New Orleans, bent on having a good time, and as many
adventures as possible, which Richard was to describe in a series of
articles.  These appeared later on in a volume entitled "Three Gringos
in Venezuela."


January, 1895.

DEAR FAM:

On board Breakwater at anchor.  You will be pleased to hear that I am
writing this in a fine state of perspiration in spite of the fact that
I have light weight flannels, no underclothes and all the windows open.
It is going to storm and then it will be cooler.  We have had a bully
time so far although the tough time is still to come, that will be
going from Puerto Cortez to Tegucigalpa.  At Belize the Governor
treated us charmingly and gave us orderlies and launches and lunches
and advice and me a fine subject for a short story.  For nothing has
struck me as so sad lately as did Sir Anthony Moloney K. C. M. G.
watching us go off laughing and joking in his gilded barge to wherever
we pleased and leaving him standing alone on his lawn with some papers
to sign and then a dinner tete-a-tete with his Secretary and so on to
the end of his life.  It was pathetic to hear him listen to all the
gossip from the outside world and to see how we pleased him when we
told him we were getting more bald than he was and that he would make a
fine appearance in the Row at his present weight.  He had not heard of
Trilby!!

We struck a beautiful place today called Livingston where we went
ashore and photographed the army in which there was no boy older than
eighteen and most of them under ten.  It was quite like Africa, the
homes were all thatched and the children all naked and the women mostly
so.  We took lots of photographs and got on most excellently with the
natives who thought we were as funny as we thought them.  Almost every
place we go word has been sent ahead and agents and consuls and custom
house chaps come out to meet me and ask what they can do.  This is very
good and keeps Griscom and Somerset in a proper frame of awe.  But
seriously I could not ask for better companions, they are both
enormously well informed and polite and full of fun.  The night the
Governor asked Somers to dinner and did not ask us we waited up for him
and then hung him out over the side of the boat above the sharks until
he swore he would never go away from us again.  Griscom is more
aggravatingly leisurely but he has a most audacious humor and talks to
the natives in a way that fills them with pleasure but which nearly
makes Somers and I expose the whole party by laughing.  Today we lie
here taking in banannas and tomorrow I will see Conrad, Conrad,
Conrad!!  Send this to the Consul.  Lots of love.

DICK.


SAN PEDRO--SULA--February, 1895.

MY DEAR FAMILY:

The afternoon of the day we were in Puerto Cortez the man of war
Atlanta steamed into the little harbor and we all cheered and the
lottery people ran up the American flag.  Then I and the others went
out to her as fast as we could be rowed and I went over the side and
the surprise of the officers was very great.  They called Somers and
Griscom to come up and we spent the day there.  They were a much
younger and more amusing lot of fellows than those on the Minneapolis
and treated us most kindly.  It was a beautiful boat and each of us
confessed to feeling quite tempted to go back again to civilization
after one day on her.  Their boat had touched at Tangier and so they
claimed that she was the one meant in the Exiles.  They told me that
the guide Isaac Cohen whom I mentioned in Harper's Weekly carries it
around as an advertisement and wanted to ship with them as cabin boy.
We left the next day on the railroad and the boys finding that two
negroes sat on the cowcatcher to throw sand on the rails in slippery
places bribed them for their places and I sat on the sand box.  I never
took a more beautiful drive.  We did not go faster than an ordinary
horse car but still it was exciting and the views and vistas wonderful.
Sometimes we went for a half mile under arches of cocoanut palms and a
straight broad leafed palm called the manaca that rises in separate
leaves sixty feet from the ground.  Imagine a palm such as we put in
pots at weddings and teas as high as Holy Trinity Church and hundreds
and hundreds of them.  The country is very like Cuba but more luxuriant
in every way.  There are some trees with marble like trunks and great
branches covered with oriole nests and a hundred orioles flying in and
out of them or else plastered with orchids.  If Billy Furness were to
see in what abundance they grew he would be quite mad.  It is a great
pity he did not come with us.  This little town is the terminus of the
railroad and we have been here four days while Jeffs the American
Colonel in the Hondurean Army is getting our outfit.  It has been very
pleasant and we are in no hurry which is a good thing for us.  It is a
most exciting country and as despotic as all uncivilized and unstable
governments must be.  But we have called on the Governor of the
district with Jeffs and he gave us a very fine letter to all civil and
unmilitary authorities in the district calling on them to aid and
protect us in every way.  I am getting awfully good material for my
novel and for half a dozen stories to boot only I am surprised to find
how true my novel was to what really exists here.  About ten years ago
---- disappeared, having as I thought drunk himself to death.  He came
up to me here on my arrival with a lot of waybills in his hand and I
learned that he had been employed in this hole in the ground by a
railroad for two years.  I remembered meeting him at Newport when I was
still at Lehigh, and last night he asked me to dinner and told me what
he had been doing which included everything from acting in South
America to blacking boots in Australia.  His boss was a Pittsburgh
engineer who is apparently licking him into shape and who told me to
tell his father that he had stopped drinking absolutely.  His colored
"missus" sat with us at the table and played with a beetle during the
three hours I stayed there during which time he asked me about ---- who
he said had ruined him.  He told me of how ---- had done and said this,
and the contrast to the thatched roof and the mud floor and the Scotch
American engineer and the mulatto girl was rather striking.  I never
had more luck in any trip than I have had on this one and the luck of
R. H. D. of which I was fond of boasting seems to hold good.  That man
of war, for instance, was the only American one that had touched at
Puerto Cortez in TEN years and it came the day we did and left the day
we did.  We saw a big lithograph of Eddie Sothern in a palm hut here so
we went before a notary and swore to it and had three seals put on the
paper and sent it him as a joke.  We start tomorrow the 22nd so you see
we are behind our schedule and I suppose you people are all worried to
death about us.  We will be much longer than six days on our way to
Tegucigalpa as we are going shooting and also to pay our respects to
Bogran the ex-president and the man who is getting up the next
revolution.  But we take care to tell everyone we are travelling for
pleasure and are great admirers of Bonilla the present president.
Somers and I are getting on famously.  He is a very fine boy with a
great sense of humor and apparently very fond of me. We had five men
counting Jeffs who we call our military attache and Charwood and four
drivers and eleven mules so it is quite an outfit.  In Ecuador with one
more man it would constitute a revolution.

DICK.


SANTA BARBARA--January 25, 1895.

DEAR FAM:

We are not at Tegucigalpa as you observe but travelling in this
country.  "As you see it on Broadway " and as you see it here are two
different things.  We have had five days of it so far and rested here
today in order to pay our respects to General Bogran the ex-president
of the Republic.  It is still six days to Tegucigalpa.  The trip across
Central America will certainly be one of the most interesting
experiences of my life.  It is the most beautiful country I have seen
and the most barbarous.  It is also the hottest and the most
insect-ious and the dirtiest.  This latter seems a little view to take
of it but it means a great deal as the insects prevent your doing
anything in a natural way; as for instance sitting on the grass or
sleeping on the ground or hunting through the bushes.  It is pretty
much as you imagine it is from what you have read, that covers it, and
I have discovered nothing new by coming to see it.  I only verify what
others have seen.  The people are most uninteresting chiefly because
they are surly to Americans and do not make you feel welcome.  I do not
mean that I did not do well to come for I am more glad that I did than
I can say only I have not, as I have been able to do before, found
something that others have not seen.  I never expect to see such a
country again unless in Africa.  If you leave the path for ten yards
you would never get back to it except by accident and you could not get
that far away unless you cut yourself a trail.  In some places the mail
route which we follow and over which the mail is carried on the backs
of runners is cut in the rock and we go down steps as even as those of
the City Hall and for hours we travel over rough rocks and stones and a
path so narrow that your knees catch in the vines at the side.  The
mules are wonderfully sure footed and never slip although they are very
little, and I am pretty heavy.  The heat is something awful.  It bakes
you and will dry your pith helmet in ten minutes after you have soaked
it in water.  But the scenery is magnificent, sometimes we ride above
the clouds and look down into valleys stretching fifty miles away and
see the buzzards half a mile below us.  Then we go through forests of
manaca palms that spread out on a single stem sideways and form arches
over our heads with the leaves hanging in front of us like portiers or
we cross great plains of grass and cactus and rock.  The best fun is
the baths we take in the mountain streams.  They are almost as cool as
one could wish and we shoot the rapids and lie under the waterfalls and
come out with all the soreness rubbed out of us as though we had been
massaged.  We went shooting for two days but as they had no dogs we did
not do much.  I got the best shot of the trip and missed it. It was a
large wild cat and he turned his side full on but I fired over him.
Somers and I spent most of the time firing chance shots at alligators,
but they never gave us a good chance as the birds warn them when they
are in danger.  One old fellow fifteen feet long beat us for some time
and then Somers and I started across the river to catch him asleep.  It
was like the taking of Lungtepen.  We had our money belts around our
necks and our shoes in one hand and rifles in the other.  The rapids
ran very fast and the last I saw of Somerset he was sitting on the bank
he had started from counting out wet bank notes and blowing the water
out of his gun barrel.  I got across all right by sticking my feet
between rocks and put on my shoes and crawled up on the old Johnnie.
He smelt of musk so strong that you could have found him in the dark.
I had, a beautiful shot at him at fifty yards but I was too greedy and
ran around some rocks to get nearer and he heard me and dived.  I shot
a macaw, one of those overgrown parrots with tail feathers three feet
from tip to tip.  I got him with a rifle and as Griscom had got his
with a shotgun I came out all right as a marksman although I was very
sore at missing the wild cat.  We sleep in hats and we sleep precious
little for the dogs and pigs and insects all help to keep us awake and
I cannot get used to a hammock.  The native beds are made of matting
such as they put over tea chests, or bull's hide stretched.  Last night
I slept in a hut with a woman and her three daughters all over fifteen
and they sat up and watched me prepare for bed with great interest.  I
would not have missed this trip for any other I know.  I wanted to
rough it and we've roughed it and we will have another week of it too.
We have some remarkable photographs and the article ought to be most
interesting.  Bogran proved to be a very handsome and remarkable man
and we had a very interesting talk with him.  From Tegucigalpa we will
probably go directly to Venezuela across the Isthmus of Panama and not
visit another Republic.  We have all travelled too much to care to
duplicate, and that is what we would be doing by remaining longer in
Central America.  A month of it will be enough of it and we will not
get away from Amapala before the first of February.  We are all well
and happy and dirty and sing and laugh and tell stories and listen to
Griscom's anecdotes of the aristocracy as we pick our way along.  So
goodbye and God bless you all.

DICK.


TEGUCIGALPA,  CENTRAL  AMERICA.

February 1st, 1895.

4th, 1895.

DEAR FAMILY--

Here we are at last, the trip from Santa Barbara where I last wrote you
was made in six days.  It was not so interesting as the first part
because it was very high up and the tropical scenery gave way to
immensely tall pines and other trees that might have been in
California, or the Rockies.  The Corderillas which is the name of the
mountains we crossed are a continuation, by the way, of the Rockies,
and the Andes but are not more than 4,000 feet high.  We had two very
hot days of it in the plains of Comgaqua where there was once a city of
60,000 founded by Cortez but where there are not now more than 6,000.
The heat was awful.  We peeled all over our faces and hands and dodged
and ducked our heads as though some one were biting at us.  My saddle
and clothes were so hot that I could not place my hand on them.  At one
village we heard that a bull fight was to be given at the next fifteen
miles away, so we rode on there and arrived in time to take part.  They
had enclosed the plaza with a barricade of logs seven feet high, bound
together with vines.  They roped a big bull and lassoed him all over
and then a man got on his back with spurs on his bare feet and held on
by the ropes around the bull's body and by his toes and threw a cloak
over the bull's eyes when ever it got too near any one-- They stuck it
with spears until it was mad and then let the lassoes slip and the bull
started off to tear out the torreadors.  I thought it would be a great
sporting act to kodak a bull while it was charging you and so we all
volunteered to act as torreadors and it was most exciting and funny.
It was rather late to get good results but I got some pretty good
pictures of the bull coming at me with his head down and then I'd skip
into a hole in the wall.  The best pictures I got were of Somers and
Griscom scrambling over the seven foot barriers with the bull in hot
chase.  We all looked so funny in our high boots and helmets and so
much alike that the savages yelled with delight and thought we had been
engaged especially for their pleasure.  Our "mosers," or mule drivers
treated us most insolently but we could not do anything because Jeffs.
had engaged them and we did not want to interfere with his authority
but at a place the last day out one of them told Jeffs. he lied and
that we all lied.  He had lost or stolen a canteen of Griscom's and
they had said we had not given it to him.  Jeffs. went at him right and
left and knocked him all over the shop.  There were half a dozen
drunken mule drivers at the place and we thought they would take a hand
but they did not.  That night Jeffs. thought to try us to see what we
would have done and left us bathing in a mountain stream and rode on
ahead and hid himself behind a rock in a canon and lay in ambush for
us.  We were jogging along in the moonlight and Somerset was reciting
the "Walrus and the Carpenter," when suddenly Jeffs. let out a series
of yells in Spanish and opened fire on us over our heads.  Somerset was
riding my mule and I had no weapons, so I yelled at him to shoot and he
fell off his mule and ran to mine and let go at the rock behind which
Jeffs. was with the carbines.  So that in about five seconds Jeffs.'
curiosity was perfectly satisfied as to what we would do, and he
shouted for mercy.  We thought it was a sentry or brigands and were
greatly disappointed when it turned out to be Jeffs.  We got here last
night and a dirtier or more dismal place you never saw.  We had
telegraphed ahead for rooms but nothing was in order and we were lodged
much worse than we had been several times in the interior where there
was occasionally a clean floor.  This morning we wrote direct to the
President, asking for an interview or audience and did not ask our
Consul to help us because Jeffs. had asked him in our presence to come
meet us and he said he would after he had done talking to some other
men, but he never came.  Before we heard from Bonilla however, we
learned that the Vice-president who has the same name was to be sworn
in so we went to the palace along with the populace in their bare feet.
We sat out of sight but the English Consul who was the finest looking
person in the chamber--all over gold lace--saw us and asked that we be
given places in front, which the minister of something asked us to take
but we objected on account of our clothes.  Somers had on a flannel
suit that looked exactly like pajamas and lawn tennis shoes.  But as
soon as the ceremony was over they insisted on our going in to the
banquet hall and in spite of our objections we were there conveyed and
presented to Bonilla who behaved very well and after saying he had
received our letters but had not had time to read them left us and
avoided us, which was what we wanted for we looked like the devil.  We
met everybody else though and took the English and Guatemalian Consuls
back to our rooms and gave them drinks and then we went to their rooms,
so the day went very pleasantly.  The President sent us a funny printed
card appointing an audience at eleven to-morrow.  It is exactly what
you would imagine it would be, the soldiers are barefooted except about
fifty and the President leaned out of the window in his shirt sleeves
after the review and they have not plastered up the holes in his palace
that his cannon made in it just a year ago to-day, when he was fighting
Vasquez, and Vasquez was then on the inside and Bonilla on the hills.
I forgot to tell you that this morning a boy about sixteen years old,
with a policeman's badge and club came to our window and talked
pleasantly with us or at us rather, while we shaved and guyed him in
English.  Finally we found that he had come to arrest Jeffs. so we told
him where Jeffs. was but he preferred to watch us shave and we finished
it under his custody.  Then we went to the Commandante and found that
the mosers had had Jeffs. arrested for not paying them on their arrival
at Tegucigalpa, as we had distinctly told them we would not do but at
San Pedro from where we took them, on their return.  It was only a
spite case suggested by Jeffs. thrashing their leader.  The Commandante
gave them a scolding and we went out in triumph.


February 4th--

Your cable received all right.  We were very glad to hear.  We have
decided to go on by mules to Manaqua, the Capital of Nicaragua, and
from there either to Corinto or to Lemon on the Atlantic side.  We had
to do this or wait here ten days for the boat going south at Amapala.
It is moonlight now so that we can avoid the heat of the day.
Yesterday we went out riding with the President, who put a gold
revolver in his hip pocket before he started and made us feel that
uneasy lies the head that rules in this country.  He had two horses
that had never been ridden before, as a compliment to our powers, the
result was that the Vice-president's horse almost killed him, which I
guess the President intended it should and the horse Griscom rode
backed all over the town.  He was a stallion and had never been ridden
before that day.  Mine was a gentle old gee-gee and yet I felt good
when we were all on the ground again.  The British consul gave Somers a
fine reception and raised the flag for him and had the band there to
play "God Save the Queen," which he had spent the whole morning in
teaching them.  Griscom and I called on our Consul and played his
guitar.  We bought one for ourselves for the rest of the trip.

I want you to do something for me: keep all the unfavorable notices you
get.  I know Mother won't do it, so I shall expect Nora to make a point
of saving them from the waste-paper basket.  If there is not a lot of
them when I get back, I will raise a row.

DICK.


MANAQUA--NICARAGUA--February 13, 1895.

DEAR FAM:

I had a great deal to tell you, but we have just received copies of the
Panama Star and have read of the trolley riots in Brooklyn, a crisis in
France, War in the Balkans, a revolution in Honolulu and another in
Colombia.  The result is that we feel we are not in it and we are all
kicking and growling and abusing our luck.  How Claiborne and Russell
will delight over us and in telling how the militia fired on the
strikers and how Troop A fought nobly.  Never mind our turn will come
someday and we may see something yet.  We have had the deuce of a time
since we left Tegucigalpa.  Now we are in a land where there are bull
hide beds and canvas cots instead of hammocks and ice and railroads and
direct communication with steamship lines.  Hereafter all will be
merely a matter of waiting until the boat sails or the train starts and
the uncertainties of mules and cat boats are at an end.  It is hard to
explain about our difficulties after we left Tegucigalpa but they were
many.  We gave up our idea of riding here direct because they assured
us we could get a steam launch from Amapala to Corinto so we rode three
days to San Lorenzo on the Pacific side and took an open boat from
there to Amapala.  It was rowed by four men who walked up a notched log
and then fell back dragging the sweeps back, with the weight of their
bodies.

It was a moonlight night and they looked very picturesque rising and
sinking back and outlined against the sky.  They were naked to the
waist and rowed all night and I had a good chance to see them as I had
to lie on the bottom of the boat on three mahogany logs.  By ten the
next day we were too cramped to stand it, so we put ashore on a
deserted island and played Robinson Crusoe.  We had two biscuits and a
box of sardines among five of us but we found oysters on the rocks and
knocked a lot off with clubs and stones and the butts of our guns.
They were very good.  We also had a bath until a fish ran into me about
three feet long and cut two gashes in my leg.  We reached Amapala about
four in the afternoon.  It was an awful place; dirt and filth and no
room to move about, so we chartered an open boat to sail or row to
Corinto sixty miles distant.  You see, we could not go back to
Tegucigalpa until the steamer arrived which is to take us South of
Panama and we could not go to Manaqua either and for the same reason
that we had sent back our mule train and we would not wait in Amapala
partly because of fever which had been there and partly because we
wanted to get to Corinto where they have ice and to see Manaqua.  The
boat was about as long as the Vagabond and twice as deep and a foot or
two more across her beam.  There were four of us, five of the crew and
two natives who wanted to make the trip and who we took with us.  It
was pretty awful.  The old tub rocked like a milk shake and I was never
so ill in my life, we all lay packed together on the ribs of the boat
and could not move and the waves splashed over us but we were too ill
to care.  The next day the sun beat in on us and roasted us like an
open furnace.  The boat was a pit of heat and outside the swell of the
Pacific rose and fell and reflected the sun like copper.  We reached
Corinto in about twenty four hours and I was never so glad to get any
place before.  The town turned out to greet us and some Englishmen ran
to ask from what boat we had been ship wrecked.  They would not believe
we had taken the trip for any other reason.  They helped us very kindly
and would not let us drink all the iced water we wanted and sent us in
to bathe in a place surrounded by piles to keep out the sharks and by a
roof to shelter one from the sun.  Corinto proved to be all that
Amapala was not; clean, cool with very excellent food and broad beds of
matting.  I liked it better than any place at which we have been, we
came on here the next day to see the President and found the city hot,
dusty and of no interest.  There is an excellent hotel however and we
had a talk with the President who was a much better chap than Bonilla
being older and more civilized.  Of course there is absolutely no
reason or excuse for us if we do not get control of this canal.  If
only that it would allow our ships of war to pass from Ocean to Ocean
instead of going around the horn.  The women are really beautiful but
that has nothing to do with the canal.  Tomorrow morning we return to
Corinto as Somers and I like it best.  Griscom would like to go on
across by the route of the canal which would be a good thing were we
certain of meeting a steamer at Simon or Greytown, but the Minister who
went last month that way had to wait there sixteen days.  So, we will
probably leave Corinto on the 17th or 20th, there are two steamers, one
that stops at ports and one that does not.  They both arrive together.
I do not know which we will take but--this letter will go with me. Up
to date I think the trip will make a good story but it will have to be
a personal one about the three of us for the country as it stands is
uninteresting to the general reader for the reason that it DUPLICATES
itself in everything.  But with our photographs and a humorous story,
it ought to be worth reading and I have picked enough curious things to
make it of some value.


February 15,--Corinto.

We are back here now and rid of that dusty, dirty city.  You would be
amused if you saw this place and tried to understand why we prefer it
to any place we have seen.  There is surf bathing at a half mile
distant and a good hotel with a great bar where a Frenchman gives us
ice and the sea captains and agents for mines and plantations in the
interior gather to play billiards.  Outside there are rows of handsome
women with decollete gowns and shining black hair and colored silk
scarfs selling fruit and down the one street which faces the bay are a
double row of palms and the store where two American boys have a
phonograph.  They are the only Americans I have met who have or are
taking a dollar out of this country.  They play the guitar and banjo
very well.  One of them was on the Princeton glee club and their
stories of how they have toured Central America are very amusing.  Lots
of Love.

DICK.


S. S. Barracouta--Off San Juan

February 21, 1895.

DEAR MOTHER:

Today I believe is the 21st.  We are out two days from Corinto off San
Juan on the boundary of Costa Rica and lie here some hours.  Then we go
on without stopping to Panama arriving there about the 25th.  On the
28th we take the steamer to Caracas.  We will be at Caracas a week and
then go straight home.  But in the meanwhile we will have got one mail
at Colon when we go there to take the boat for Caracas and glad I will
be to get it.  We have had a summary of the news in the Panama Star and
a bundle of Worlds telling all about the trolley strike and that is all
except Dad's cable at Tegucigalpa that we have heard in nearly two
months. I am very sorry that the distances have turned out so much
longer than we expected and that we had that unfortunate ten days wait
for the steamer.  I know you want me home and I would like to be there
but I do not think I ought to go without seeing Caracas.  It helps the
book so much too if one runs it into South America for no one in the
States thinks much of Central and does not want to read about it.  At
least I know I never did.  We have had a most amusing time with the two
phonograph chaps.  One of them has been an advertising agent and a
deputy sheriff and chased stage coach robbers and kept a hard-ware
store and is only twenty-five and the other has not had quite as much
experience but has been to Princeton, he is 23.  The mixture of
narratives which change from tricks of the hard-ware trade to dances at
Buckingham Palace and anecdotes of Cliff House supper parties at San
Francisco are very interesting.  I am going to write a book for them
and call it "Through Central America with a Phonograph" or "Who We Did,
and How We Done Them."  We sing the most beautiful medleys and
contribute to the phonograph.  I had to protest against them announcing
"Her Golden Hair was Hanging Down her Back" by Richard Harding Davis
and Somerset kicked at their introducing "God Save the Queen" as sung
by "His Grace the Duke of Bedford" which they insist in thinking his
real title and his name; if he would only confess the truth.  You
cannot have any idea of how glad I am that I took this trip, just this
particular trip, not for any interest it will be to the gentle reader
but for the benefit it has been to me.  All the things I was nervous
about have been done and should I get nerves again as I suppose I
always will in one form or another I can get rid of them by remembering
how I got rid of them before during this most peculiar excursion.  For
though I and we all told the truth about being well, we were in a most
trying place at times and the ride we took and the sail to get away
from possible fever was very much of a strain.  I do not see how
Griscom kept up as he did for he was an invalid and very nervous when
he started.  But he showed great sporting blood.  It was much better
having three than two and he furnished us with much amusement at which
he never complains.  His artlessness and his bad breaks which keep us
filled with terror make the most entertaining narratives and he tells
them on himself and then keeps on making new ones.  One night Jeffs
came down with fever through bathing in the mountain streams, a
practice which did not hurt us but which natives of the country cannot
do in safety, and I confess I was scared.  Jeffs pulled through in a
few days.  It was odd that the man who had lived here eleven years
should have been the only one to give up throughout the whole trip and
he was a good sport, too.

I will have the Central American stories all done or nearly so by the
time we reach New York which is one of the comforts of this over
abundance of sea voyages.  I have the lottery story nearly written and
am wondering now if Bissell will let me publish it.  Would it not be a
good idea to have Dad, if he knows him, explain about how I went South
to write it and just what it is and get his official sanction or shall
I write or get the Harper's to write when I get back.  The lottery
people in joke offered  $10,000 if they could write the story
themselves.  And sometimes I wish they would for it is the hardest kind
of work.  I do not want to advertise their old game and yet I cannot
help doing it, in a way.  We put in at Punta Arenas and I found a woman
looking at us with an opera glass and shortly after she sent out to say
she knew me and that she wanted me to come up.  It seemed I met her in
Elizabeth, New Jersey with Eddie Coward where she was playing in
private theatricals.  Since then as a punishment no doubt she has lived
here and her husband is Minister of the Navy with one gun boat.  This
trip is very hot and I sleep on deck and look up at the stars and the
light on the jib and the smoke spoiling the firmament.  It makes you
feel terribly far away from the centre of civilization in front of the
fire and you all trying to make out where we are at.  I hope you know
more about it than we do.

It is the worst country for getting about that I ever heard of.  It has
revived my interest and belief in all such beautiful things as buried
treasures and hidden cities and shooting men against stone walls and
filibusters.  There are not many of these stories but every man tells
them differently so they have all the freshness of a new tale.  There
is no ice on this boat or lemons or segars.  It is the first time so
they say that it has happened in twelve months, but after this it must
be better.  At Panama they fine the ice man $1000 every day his machine
breaks and so we have hopes.  I feel so very, very selfish off down
here and leaving you all alone and it makes me lose my temper more than
usual when all these delays occur but I promise to be good hereafter
and we will be together soon now by the end of March sure and I hope
you will not miss me too much, as much as I miss all of you.  Sometimes
I wish you could see some of these islands and the long shadowy sharks
and the turtles, there are thousands of turtles as big as tubs just
floating around like empty bottles, but I have never on the whole taken
a trip when I so seldom wished that the family were around to enjoy it.
It used to hurt me during the Mediterranean trip but there is not much
that would please you in this outfit.  I like it because I am satisfied
to go dirty for weeks at a time and to talk to the engineer or the
queer passengers and to pick up stories and improve my geography but I
do not think the scenery would compensate either Nora or you or Dad for
the lack of necessities and CLEANTH.  When we were crossing the
continent I don't believe I had a spot on me as big as a nickel without
three bites on it, all sorts of bites, they just swarmed over you all
sizes, colors and varieties.  They came from dogs, from the sand, from
trees, from the grass, from the air.  The worst were little red bugs
that lay under the leaves called carrapati's and that came off on you
in a hundred at a time.  And there were also "jiggers" that get under
your nails and leave eggs there.  Some times we could not sleep at all
for the bites and you had to carry a brush to brush the carripats off
every time you passed through bushes.  It's the damnedest country I was
ever in now that I have time to think of it.  The other day I was going
in to bathe and the sand was so hot that I could not get to the
breakers and so I went yelling and jumping back to the grass and the
grass was just one mass of burrs, so I gave another yell and leaped on
to a big log and the log was full of thorns.  That's the sort of
country it is.  And then after you do make a dash for the surf a shark
makes a dash for you and you don't know what you are here for anyway.
It had its humorous side and it was very funny, especially as it never
turned out otherwise, to see the men scamper when the sharks came in.
They never scented us for ten minutes or so and then they would swim up
and we would give a yell and all make for the shore head over heels and
splashing and shrieking and scared and excited.  There would always be
one man who was further out than the rest and he could not hear on
account of the waves and we would all line up on the beach and yell and
dance up and down and try to attract his attention.  But you would see
him go on diving and playing along in horrible loneliness until he
turned to speak to some one and found the man gone and then he would
look for the others and when he saw us all on the shore he would give
one wild whoop out of him and go falling over himself with his hair on
end and his eyes and mouth wide open.  I saw one shark ten feet long
but we would have died of the heat if we had not bathed so we thought
it was worth it.  That's over now because we cannot get any more sea
bathing.  Just around Panama.  Finest place seen yet.

RICHARD.


PANAMA, February 28th, 1895.

DEAR MOTHER:

Griscom has awakened to the fact that he is a Press correspondent and
is interviewing rebels who come stealthily by night followed by spies
of the government and sit in Griscom's room with the son of the Consul
General, as interpreter.  Somerset and I refuse to be implicated and
sit in the plaza waiting for a file of soldiers to carry Griscom off
which is our cue for action.  There is a man-of-war, the Atlanta, the
one we made friends with at Puerto Cortez, lying at Colon and so we
feel safe.  We may now be said to be absorbing local color.  That is
about all we have done since we left Amapala.  And if it were not that
you are all alone up there, I would not mind it.  I would probably
continue on.  We know it now as we do London or Paris.  We can
distinguish sea captains, lawyers in politics, commandantes, oldest
residents, gentlemenly good for nothings, shipping agents and
commission dealers, coffee planters and men who are "on the beach" with
unerring eye.  We know the story of each before he tells it, or it is
told by some one else.  The Commandante shot a lot of men by the side
of a road during the last revolution, first allowing them to dig their
own graves and is here now so that he can pay himself by stealing the
custom dues, the lawyer politician has been to Cornell and taken a
medical degree in Paris and aspires to be a deputy and only remembers
New York as the home of Lillian Russell.  The commission merchants are
all Germans and the coffee planters are all French.  They point with
pride to little bare-foot boys selling sea shells and cocoanuts as
their offspring, although they cannot remember their names.  The sea
captains you can tell by their ready made clothes of a material that
would be warm in Alaska and by them wearing Spanish dollars for watch
guards and by the walk which is rolling easily when sober and pitching
heavily toward the night.  The oldest resident always sits in front of
the hotel and in the same seat, with a tortoise shell cane and
remembers when Vasquez or Mendoza or Barrios, or Bonilla occupied the
Cathedral and fired hot shot into the Palace and everybody took refuge
in the English Consulate and he helped guard the bank all night with a
Springfield rifle.  The men who are on the beach have just come out of
the hospital where they have had yellow fever and they want food.  This
story is intended to induce you to get rid of them hurriedly by a small
token.  Sometimes out of this queer combination you will get a good
story but generally they want to show you a ruined abbey or a document
as old as the Spanish occupation or to make you acquainted with a man
who has pearls to sell, or a coffee plantation or a collection of
unused stamps which he stole while a post-office employee.  Our chief
sport now is to go throw money at the prisoners who are locked up in a
row of dungeons underneath the sea wall.  The people walk and flirt and
enjoy the sea breeze above them and the convicts by holding a mirror
between the bars of the dungeons can see who is leaning over the
parapet above them.  Then they hold out their hands and you drop
nickels and they fail to catch them and the sentry comes up and teases
them by holding the money a few inches beyond their reach.  They climb
all over the crossbars in their anxiety to get the money and look like
great monkeys.  At night it is perfectly tremendous for their is only a
light over their heads and they crawl all over the bars beneath this,
standing on each other's shoulders and pushing and fighting and yelling
half naked and wholey black and covered with sweat.  As a matter of
fact they are better content to stay in jail than out and when the
British Consul offered to send eight of them back to Jamaica they
refused to go and said they would rather serve out their sentence of
eight years.  This is the way the place looks and I am going to
introduce it in a melodrama and have some one lower files down to the
prisoners.  DICK.


After some not very eventful or pleasant days at Caracas, Richard
sailed for home and from the steamer wrote the following letter:


March 26th--On board S. S. Caracas.

DEAR CHAS:

Off the coast of God's country.  Hurrah!  H---- did not come near us
until the morning of our departure when he arrived at the Station
trembling all over and in need of a shave.  But in the meanwhile the
consul at Caracas picked Griscom and myself up in the street and took
us in to see Crespo who received us with much dignity and politeness.
So we met him after all and helped the story out that much.

There is not much more to tell except that I was never so glad to set
my face home as I am now and even the roughness of this trip cannot
squelch my joy.  It seems to me as if years had passed since we left
and to think we are only three days off from Sandy Hook seems much too
wonderfully good to be possible.  Some day when we have dined alone
together at Laurent's I will tell you the long story of how Somers and
Gris came to be decorated with the Order of the Bust of Bolivar the
Liberator of Venezuela of the 4th class but at present I will only say
that there is a third class of the order still coming to me in Caracas,
as there is 20 minutes still coming to Kelly in Brooklyn.  It was a
matter of either my getting the third class, which I ought to have had
anyway having the third class of another order already, and THEIR
GETTING NOTHING, or our all getting the 4th or 5th class and of course
I choose that they should get something and so they did and for my
aimable unselfishness in the matter they have frequently drunken my
health.  I was delighted when Somers got his for he was happier over it
than I have ever seen him over anything and kept me awake nights
talking about it.  I consider it the handsomest order there is after
the Legion of Honor and I have become so crazy about Bolivar who was a
second Washington and Napoleon that I am very glad to have it, although
I still sigh for the third class with its star and collar.

The boys are especially glad because we have organized a Traveller's
Club of New York of which we expect great things and they consider that
it starts off well in having three of the members possessors of a
foreign order.  We formed the club while crossing Honduras in sight of
the Pacific Ocean and its object is to give each other dinners and to
present a club medal to people who have been nice to and who have
helped members of the club while they were in foreign parts.  It is my
idea and I think a good one as there are lots of things one wants to do
for people who help you and this will be as good as any.  Members of
the club are the only persons not eligible to any medal bestowed by the
club and the eligibility for membership is determined by certain
distances which a man must have travelled.  Although the idea really is
to keep it right down to our own crowd and make each man justify the
smallness of the club's membership by doing something worth while.  I
am President.  Bonsal is vice president.  Russell treasurer and Griscom
Secretary.  Somerset is the solitary member.  You and Sam and Helen and
Elizabeth Bisland are at present the only honorary members.  We are
also giving gold medals to the two chaps who crossed Asia on bicycles,
to Willie Chanler and James Creelman, but that does not make them
members.  It only shows we as a club think they have done a sporting
act.  I hope you like the idea.  We have gone over it for a month and
considered it in every way and I think we are all well enough known to
make anybody pleased to have us recognize what they did whether it was
for any of us personally or for the public as explorers.  On this trip
for instance we would probably send the club medals in silver to
Admiral Meade, to Kelly, to Royas the Venezuelan Minister for the
orders to the Governor of Belize, to the consul at La Guayra and to one
of the phonograph chaps.  In the same way if you would want to send a
medal to any man or woman prince or doctor who had been kind,
courteous, hospitable or of official service to you you would just send
in a request to the committee.  Write me soon and with lots of love
DICK.


In April, 1895, Richard was back in New York, at work on his South and
Central American articles, and according to the following letters,
having a good time with his old friends.


NEW YORK, April 27, 1895.

DEAR CHAS:

I read in the paper the other morning that John Drew was in Harlem, so
I sent him a telegram saying that I was organizing a relief expedition,
and would bring him out of the wilderness in safety.  At twelve I sent
another reading, "Natives from interior of Harlem report having seen
Davis Relief Expeditionary Force crossing Central Park, all well.
Robert Howard Russell."  At two I got hold of Russell, and we
telegraphed "Relief reached Eighty-fifth street; natives peacefully
inclined, awaiting rear column, led by Griscom; save your ammunition
and provisions."  Just before the curtain fell we sent another,
reading:  "If you can hold the audience at bay for another hour, we
guarantee to rescue yourself and company and bring you all back to the
coast in safety.  Do not become disheartened."  Then we started for
Harlem in a cab with George and another colored man dressed as African
warriors, with assegai daggers and robes of gold and high turbans and
sashes stuck full of swords.  I wore my sombrero and riding breeches,
gauntlets and riding boots, with cartridge belts full of bum cartridges
over my shoulder and around the waist.  Russell had my pith helmet and
a suit of khaki and leggins.  Griscom was in one of my coats of many
pockets, a helmet and boots.  We all carried revolvers, canteens and
rifles.  We sent George in with a note saying we were outside the
zareba and could not rescue him because the man on watch objected to
our guns.  As soon as they saw George they rushed out and brought us
all in.  Drew was on the stage, so we tramped into the first entrance,
followed by all the grips, stage hands and members of the company.  The
old man heard his cue just as I embraced him, and was so rattled that
when he got on the stage he could not say anything, and the curtain
went down without any one knowing what the plot was about.  When John
came off, I walked up to him, followed by the other four and the entire
company, and said:  "Mr. Drew, I presume," and he said:  "Mr. Davis, I
believe.  I am saved!" Helen Benedict happened to be in Maude Adams'
dressing-room, and went off into a fit, and the company was delighted
as John would have been had he been quite sure we were not going on the
stage or into a box.  We left them after we had had a drink, although
the company besought us to stay and protect them, and got a supper
ready in Russell's rooms, at which Helen, Ethel Barrymore, John and
Mrs. Drew, Maude Adams and Griscom were present.

DICK.


NEW YORK, November, 1895.

DEAR MOTHER:--

The china cups have arrived all right and are a beautiful addition to
my collection and to my room, in which Daphne still holds first place.

What do you think Sir Henry sent me?  The medal and his little black
pipe in a green velvet box about as big as two bricks laid side by side
with a heavy glass top with bevelled edges and the medal and pipe lying
on a white satin bed, bound down with silver--and a large gold plate
with the inscription "To Richard Harding Davis with the warmest
greetings from Gregory Brewster--1895"-- You have no idea how pretty it
is, Bailey, Banks and Biddle made it-- It is just like him to do
anything so sweet and thoughtful and it has attracted so many people
that I have had it locked up-- No Burden jewel robbers here-- My
friend, the Russian O---- lady still pursues me and as she has no sense
of humor and takes everything seriously, she frightens me-- I am afraid
she will move in at any moment-- She has asked me to spend the summer
with her at Paris and Monte Carlo, and at her country place in Norfolk
and bombards me with invitations to suppers and things in the meantime.
She has just sent me a picture of herself two feet by three, with
writing all over it and at any moment, I expect her to ring the bell
and order her trunks taken up stairs-- I am too attractive-- Last night
I dined with Helen and Maude Adams, who is staying with her.  I want
them to board me too.  Maude sang for us after dinner and then went off
to see Yvette Guilbert at a "sacred concert" to study her methods.  I
went to N----'s box to hear Melba and we chatted to the accompaniment
of Melba, Nordica and Plancon in a trio--the Ogre, wore fur, pearls,
white satin and violets.  It was a pink silk box.  Then I went down to
a reception at Mrs. De Koven's and found it was a play.  Everybody was
seated already so I squatted down on the floor in front of Mrs. De
Koven and a tall woman in a brocade gown cut like a Japanese woman's--
It was very dark where the audience was, so I could not see her face
but when the pantomime was over I looked up and saw it was Yvette
Guilbert.  So I grabbed Mrs. De Koven and told her to present me and
Guilbert said in English-- "It is not comfortable on the floor is it?"
and I said, "I have been at your feet for three years now, so I am
quite used to it"--for which I was much applauded-- Afterwards I told
some one to tell her in French that I had written a book about Paris
and about her and that I was going to mark it and send it and before
the woman could translate, Guilbert said, "No, send me the Van Bippere
book"-- So we asked her what she meant and she said, " M. Bourget told
me to meet you and to read your Van Bippere Book, you are Mr. Davis,
are you not?"-- So after that I owned the place and refused to meet
Mrs. Vanderbilt.

Yvette has offered to teach me French, so I guess I won't go to
Somerset's wedding, unless O---- scares me out of the country.  I got
my $2,000 check and have paid all my debts.  They were not a third as
much as I thought they were, so that's all right.

Do come over mother, as soon as you can and we will meet at Jersey
City, and have a nice lunch and a good talk.  Give my bestest love to
Dad and Nora.  How would she like Yvette for a sister-in-law?  John
Hare has sent me seats for to night-- He is very nice-- I have begun
the story of the "Servants' Ball" and got well into it.

and lots of love.

DICK.



The following letter was written to me at Florence.  The novel referred
to was "Soldiers of Fortune," which eventually proved the most
successful book, commercially, my brother ever wrote.  Mrs. Hicks, to
whom Richard frequently refers, is the well-known English actress
Ellaline Terriss, the wife of Seymour Hicks.  Somerset is Somers
Somerset, the son of Lady Henry Somerset, and the Frohman referred to
is Daniel Frohman, who was the manager of the old Lyceum Theatre.

Early in November, William R. Hearst asked my brother to write a
description of the Yale-Princeton football game for The Journal.
Richard did not want to write the "story" and by way of a polite
refusal said he could not undertake it for less than $500.00.  Greatly
to his surprise Hearst promptly accepted the offer.  At the time, I
imagine this was by far the largest sum ever paid a writer for
reporting a single event.


December 31st, 1895.
  New York.
    The Players.

New Year's Eve.

DEAR CHAS:

I am not much of a letter writer these days, but I have finished the
novel and that must make up for it.  It goes to the Scribners for
$5,000 which is not as much as I think I should have got for it.  I am
now lying around here until the first of February, when I expect to
sail to Somerset's wedding, reaching you in little old Firenzi in
March.  We will then paint it.  After that I do not know what I shall
do.  The Journal is after me to do almost anything I want at my own
figure, as a correspondent.  They have made Ralph London correspondent
and their paper is the only one now to stick to.  They are trying to
get all the well known men at big prices.

I have had such a good time helping Mrs. Hicks in Seymour's absence.
She had about everything happen to her that is possible and she is just
the sort of little person you love to do things for.  She finally
sailed and I am now able to attend to my own family.

The Central American and Venezuelan book comes out on February lst.
Several of the papers here jokingly alluded to the fact that my article
on the Venezuelan boundary had inspired the President's message.  Of
course you get garbled ideas of things over there and exaggerated ones,
as for instance, on the Coxey army.  But you never saw anything like
the country after that war message. It was like living with a British
fleet off Sandy Hook.  Everybody talked of it and of nothing else.  I
went to a dinner of 300 men all of different callings and I do not
believe one of them spoke of anything else.  Cabmen, car conductors,
barkeepers, beggars and policemen.  All talked war and Venezuela and
the Doctrine of Mr. Monroe.  In three days the country lost one
thousand of millions of dollars in values, which gives you an idea how
expensive war is.  It is worse than running a newspaper.  Now, almost
everyone is for peace, peace at any price.  I do not know of but one
jingo paper, The Sun, and war talk is greeted with jeers.  It was as if
the people had suddenly had their eyes opened to what it really meant
and having seen were wiser and wanted no more of it.  Your brother,
personally, looks at it like this.  Salisbury was to blame in the first
place for being rude and not offering to arbitrate as he had been asked
to do.  When he said to Cleveland, "It's none of your business" the
only answer was "Well, I'll make it my business" but instead of
stopping there, Cleveland uttered a cast iron ultimatum instead of
leaving a loophole for diplomacy and a chance for either or both to
back out.  That's where I blame him as does every one else.

Sam Sothern is in Chicago and we all wrote him guying letters about the
war.  Helen said she was going to engage "The Heart of Maryland"
company to protect her front yard, while Russell and I have engaged
"The Girl I Left Behind Me" company with Blanch Walsh and the original
cast.

We sent Somerset a picture of himself riddled with bullets.  And Mrs.
Hicks made herself famous by asking if it was that odious Dunraven they
were going to war about.

My article was a very lucky thing and is greatly quoted and in social
gatherings I am appealed to as a final authority.

The football story, by the way, did me a heap of good with the
newspapers and the price was quoted as the highest ever paid for a
piece of reporting.  People sent for it so that the edition was
exhausted.  The Journal people were greatly pleased.

Yvette Guilbert is at Hammerstein's and crowds the new music hall
nightly, at two dollars a seat.  Irving and Miss Terry have been most
friendly to me and to the family.  Frohman is going to put "Zenda" on
in New York because he has played a failure, which will of course kill
it for next year for Eddie, when he comes out as a star.  I have never
seen such general indignation over a private affair.  Barrymore called
it a case of Ollaga Zenda.  They even went to Brooklyn when Eddie was
playing there and asked him to stage the play for them and how he made
his changes and put on his whiskers.  Poor Eddie, he lacks a business
head and a business manager--and Sam talks and shakes his head but is
little better.  Lots of love and best wishes for the New Year.

DICK.




CHAPTER IX

MOSCOW, BUDAPEST, LONDON

The years 1896--1897 were probably the most active of Richard's very
active life.  In the space of twelve months he reported the Coronation
at Moscow, the Millennial Celebration at Budapest, the Spanish-Cuban
War, the McKinley Inauguration, the Greek-Turkish War and the Queen's
Jubilee.  Although this required a great deal of time spent in
travelling, Richard still found opportunity to do considerable work on
his novel "Captain Macklin," to which he refers in one of his letters
from London.

As correspondent of the New York American, then The Journal, Richard
went from Florence, where he was visiting me, to Moscow.  He was
accompanied by Augustus Trowbridge, an old friend of my brother's and a
rarely good linguist.  The latter qualification proved of the greatest
possible assistance to Richard in his efforts to witness the actual
coronation ceremony.  To have finally been admitted to the Kremlin my
brother always regarded as one of his greatest successes as a
correspondent.


En route--May 1896.

DEAR CHAS:

The night is passed and with the day comes "a hope" but during the
blackness I had "a suffer"-- I read until two--five hours--and then
slept until five when the middle man who had slept on my shoulder all
night left the train and the second one to whom Bernardi was so polite
left me alone and had the porter fit me up a bed so that I slept until
seven again-- Then the Guardian Angel returned for his traps and I bade
him a sleepy adieu and was startled to see two soldiers standing
shading their eyes in salute in the doorway and two gentlemen bowing to
my kind protector with the obsequiousness of servants-- He sort of
smiled back at me and walked away with the soldiers and 13 porters
carrying his traps.  So I rung up the conductor and he said it was the
King's Minister with his eyes sticking out of his head--the conductor's
eyes--not the Minister's.  I don't know what a King's Minister is but
he liked your whiskey-- I am now passing through the Austrian Tyrol
which pleases me so much that I am chortling with joy-- None of the
places for which my ticket call are on any map--but don't you care, I
don't care-- I wish I could adequately describe last night with nothing
but tunnels hours in length so that you had to have all the windows
down and the room looked like a safe and full of tobacco smoke and damp
spongey smoke from the engine, and bad air.  That first compartment I
went in was filled later with German women who took off their skirts
and the men took off their shoes.  Everybody in the rear of the car is
filthy dirty but I had a wash at the Custom house and now I am almost
clean and quite happy.  The day is beautiful and the compartment is all
my own-- I am absolutely enchanted with the Tyrol-- I have never seen
such quaint picture book houses and mills with wheels like that in the
Good for Nothing and crucifixes wonderfully carved and snow mountains
and dark green forests-- The sky is perfect and the air is filled with
the sun and the train moves so smoothly that I can see little blue
flowers, baby blue, Bavarian blue flowers, in the Spring grass.  Such
dear old castles like birds nests and such homelike old mills and
red-faced millers with feathers in their caps you never saw out of a
comic opera-- The man in here with me now is a Russian, of course, and
saw the last Coronation and knows that my suite is on the principal
Street and attends to my changing money and getting an omelette-- I can
survive another night now having had an omelette not so good as Madam
Masi's but still an omelette-- I have now left Munich and the Russian
and a conductor whom I mistook for a hereditary prince of Bavaria, with
tassels down his back, has assured me he is going to Berlin, and that I
am going to Berlin and much else to which I smile knowingly and say
mucho gracia, wee wee, ya ya, ich ich limmer and other long speeches
ending with "an er--"

DICK.


May 15th, 1896.  Moscow.

DEAR CHAS:

We left Berlin Monday night at eleven and slept well in a wagon-lit.
That was the only night out of the five that I spent in the cars that I
had my clothes off, although I was able to stretch out on the seats, so
I am cramped and tired now.  At seven Monday morning the guard woke us
and told us to get ready for the Custom House and I looked out and saw
a melancholy country of green hills and black pines and with no sign of
human life.  It was raining and dreary looking and then I saw as we
passed them a line of posts painted in black and white stripes a half
mile apart on each side of the train and I knew we had crossed the
boundary and that the line of posts stretched from the Arctic Ocean to
the Black Sea and from the Pacific to the Caucasus Mountains and the
Pamirs.  It gave me a great thrill but I have had so many to-day, that
I had almost forgotten that one.  For two days we jogged along through
a level country with meanthatched huts and black crows flying
continually and peasants in sheepskin coats, full in the skirt and
tight at the waist, with boots or thongs of leather around their feet.
The women wore boots too and all the men who were not soldiers had
their hair cropped short like mops.  We could not find any one who
understood any language, so as we never knew when we would stop for
food, we ate at every station and I am of the opinion that for months I
have been living on hot tea and caviar and hash sandwiches.  The snow
fell an inch deep on Wednesday and dried up again in an hour and the
sun shone through it all.  So on the whole it was a good trip and most
interesting.  But here we are now in a perfect pandemonium and the Czar
has not yet come nor one-fifth even of the notables.  It is a great
city, immense and overpowering in its extent.  The houses are ugly low
storied and in hideous colors except the churches which are like
mosques and painted every color.  I confess I feel beaten to night by
the noise and rush and roar and by so many strange figures and
marvellous costumes.  Our rooms are perfect that is one thing and the
situation is the very best.  If the main street were Fifth Avenue and
Madison Square the Governor's Square, his palace would be Delmonico's
and our rooms would be the corner rooms of the Brunswick, so you can
see how well we are placed.  We can sit in our windows and look down
and up the main street and see every one who leaves or calls upon the
Governor.  We are now going out for a dinner and to one of many
cafe-chantants and I will tell you the rest to-morrow, when I get
sleep, for after five nights of it I feel done up, but I feel equally
sure it is going to be a great experience and I cannot tell you how
glad 1 am that I came.  Love to you all and to dear Florence in which
Trowbridge, who is a brick, joins me.

DICK.


Moscow--May 1896.

DEAR CHAS:

There was a great deal to tell when I shut down last night, but I
thought I would have had things settled by this time and waited, but it
looks now as though there was to be no rest for the weary until the
Czar has put his crown on his head.  The situation is this: there are
ninety correspondents, and twelve are to get into the coronation, two
of these will be Americans.  There are five trying for it.

Count Daschoff, the Minister of the Court, has the say as to who gets
in of those five.  T. and I called on him with my credentials just as
he was going out.  Never have I seen such a swell.  He made us feel
like dudes from Paterson, New Jersey.  He had three diamond eagles in
an astrakan cap, a white cloak, a gray uniform, top boots and three
rows of medals.  He spoke English perfectly, with the most politely
insolent manner that I have ever had to listen to; and eight servants,
each of whom we had, in turn, mistaken for a prince royal, bowed at him
all the brief time he talked over our heads.  He sent us to the bureau
for correspondents, where they gave me a badge and a pocketbook, with
my photo in it.  They are good for nothing, except to get through the
police lines.  No one at the bureau gave us the least encouragement as
to my getting in at the coronation.  We were frantic, and I went back
to Breckenridge, our Minister, and wrote him a long letter explaining
what had happened, and that what I wrote would "live," that I was
advertised and had been advertised to write this story for months.  I
dropped The Journal altogether, and begged him to represent me as a
literary light of the finest color.  This he did in a very strong
letter to Daschoff, and I presented it this morning, but the Minister,
like Edison, said he would let me know when he could see me.  Then I
wrote Breck a letter of thanks so elegant and complimentary that he
answered with another, saying if his first failed he would try again.
That means he is for me, and at the bureau they say whichever one he
insists on will get in, but they also say he is so good-natured that he
helps every one who comes.  I told him this, and he has promised to
continue in my behalf as soon as we hear from Daschoff.

The second thing of importance is the getting the story, IF WE GET IT,
on the wire.  That, I am happy to say, we are as assured of as I could
hope to be.  I own the head of the Telegraph Bureau soul, body and
mind.  He loves the ground T.  and I spurn, and he sent out my first
cable today, one of interrogation merely, ahead of twelve others; he
has also given us the entree to a private door to his office, all the
other correspondents having to go to the press-rooms and undergo a sort
of press censorship, which entails on each man the cutting up of his
story into three parts, so as to give all a chance.  I gave T. three
dictums to guide him; the first was that we did not want a fair
chance--we wanted an unfair advantage over every one else.  Second, to
never accept a "No" or a "Yes" from a subordinate, but to take
everything from head-quarters.  Third, to use every mouse, and not to
trust to the lions.  He had practise on the train.  When he told me we
would be in Moscow in ten hours, I would say, "Who told you that," and
back he would go to the Herr Station Director in a red gown, and return
to say that we would get there in twenty hours.  By this time I will
match him against any newspaper correspondent on earth.  He flatters,
lies, threatens and bribes with a skill and assurance that is simply
beautiful, and his languages and his manners pull me out of holes from
which I could never have risen.  With it all he is as modest as can be,
and says I am the greatest diplomat out of office, which I really think
he believes, but I am only using old reporters' ways and applying the
things other men did first.

My best stroke was to add to my cable to The Journal, "Recommend ample
recognition of special facilities afforded by telegraph official"--and
then get him to read it himself under the pretext of wishing to learn
if my writing was legible.  He grinned all over himself, and said it
was.  After my first story is gone I will give him 200 roubles for
himself in an envelope and say Journal wired me to do it.  That will
fix him for the coronation story, as it amounts to six months' wages
about.  But, my dear brother, in your sweet and lovely home, where the
sun shines on the Cascine and the workmen sleep on the bridges, and
dear old ladies knit in the streets, that is only one of the thousand
things we have had to do.  It would take years to give you an account
of what we have done and why we do it.  It is like a game of whist and
poker combined and we bluff on two flimsy fours, and crawl the next
minute to a man that holds a measly two-spot.  There is not a wire we
have not pulled, or a leg, either, and we go dashing about all day in a
bath-chair, with a driver in a bell hat and a blue nightgown, leaving
cards and writing notes and giving drinks and having secretaries to
lunch and buying flowers for wives and cigar boxes for husbands, and
threatening the Minister with Cleveland's name.

John A. Logan, Jr., is coming dressed in a Russian Uniform, and he wore
it on the steamer, and says he is the special guest of the Czar and the
Secretary of the visiting mission.  Mrs. P. P. is paying $10,000 for a
hotel for one week.  That is all the gossip there is.  We lunched with
the McCooks today and enjoyed hearing American spoken, and they were
apparently very glad to have us, and made much of T. and of me. We only
hope they can help us; and I am telling the General the only man to
meet is Daschoff, and when he does I will tell him to tell Daschoff I
am the only man to be allowed in the coronation.  I wish I could tell
you about the city, but we see it only out of the corner of our eyes as
we dash to bureau after bureau and "excellency" and "royal highness"
people, and then dash off to strengthen other bridges and make new
friends.  It is great fun, and I am very happy and T. is having the
time of his life.  He told me he would rather be with me on this trip
than travel with the German Emperor, and you will enjoy to hear that he
wrote Sarah I was the most "good-natured" man he ever met.  God bless
you all, and dear, dear Florence.  Lots of love.

DICK.


Moscow--May, 1896.

DEAR CHAS:

I have just sent off my coronation story, and the strain of this thing,
which has really been on me for six months, is off.  You can imagine
what a relief it is, or, rather, you cannot, for no one who has not
been with us these last ten days can know what we have had to do.  The
story I sent is not a good one.  It was impossible to tell it by cable,
and the first one on the entry was a much better one.  I do not care
much, though; of course, I do care, as I ought to have made a great hit
with it, but there was no time, and there was so much detail and
minutia that I could not treat it right.  However, after the awful
possibility, or rather certainty, that we have had to face of not
getting any story at all, I am only too thankful.  I would not do it
again for ten thousand dollars.  Edwin Arnold, who did it for The
Telegraph, had  $25,000, and if I told you of the way Hearst acted and
Ralph interfered with impertinent cables, you would wonder I am sane.
They never sent me a cent for the cables until it was so late that I
could not get it out of the bank, and we have spent and borrowed every
penny we have.  Imagine having to write a story and to fight to be
allowed a chance to write it, and at the same time to be pressed for
money for expenses and tolls so that you were worn out by that alone.
The brightest side of the whole thing was the way everybody in this
town was fighting for me.  The entire town took sides, and even men who
disliked me, and who I certainly dislike, like C. W. and R---- of the
Paris Embassy, turned in and fought for my getting in like relations.
And the women--I had grand dukes and ambassadors and princes, whom I do
not know by sight, moving every lever, and as Stanhope of The Herald,
testified "every man, woman and child in the visiting and resident
legation is crazy on the subject of getting Davis into the coronation."
They made it a personal matter, and when I got my little blue badge,
the women kissed me and each other, and cheered, and the men came to
congratulate me, and acted exactly as though they had got it themselves.

It was a beautiful sight; the Czarina much more beautiful and more
sad-looking than ever before.  But it was not solemn enough, and the
priests groaned and wailed and chanted and sang, and every one stood
still and listened.  All that the Czar and Czarina did was over ten
minutes after they entered the chapel, and then for three hours the
priests took the center of the stage and groaned.  I was there from
seven until one.  Six solid hours standing and writing on my hat.  It
was a fine hat, for we were in court costume, I being a distinguished
visitor, as well as a correspondent.  That was another thing that
annoyed me, because Breckinridge, who has acted like a brick, did not
think he could put me on both lists, so I chose the correspondents'
list, of course, in hopes of seeing the ceremony, but knowing all the
time that that meant no balls or functions, so that had I lost the
ceremony I would have had nothing; but he arranged it so that I am on
both lists.  Not that I care now.  For I am tired to death; and
Trowbridge did not get on either list, thanks to the damned Journal and
to his using all his friends to help me, so that I guess I will get out
and go to Buda Pest and meet you in Paris.  Do not consider this too
seriously, for I am writing it just after finishing my cable and having
spent the morning on my toes in the chapel.  I will feel better
tomorrow.  Anyway, it is done and I am glad, as it was the sight of the
century, and I was in it, and now I can spend my good time and money in
gay Paree.  Love to all.

DICK.


From Moscow Richard went direct to Buda Pest, where he wrote an article
on the Hungarian Millennial.



BUDA PEST

May 8th, 1896.

CHAS:

I have just returned from the procession of the Hungarian Nobles.  It
was even more beautiful and more interesting than the Czar's entry than
which I would not have believed anything could have been more
impressive-- But the first was military, except for the carriages,
which were like something out of fairyland--to-day, the costumes were
all different and mediaeval, some nine hundred years old and none
nearer than the 15th Century.  The mis en scene was also much better.
Buda is a clean, old burgh, with yellow houses rising on a steep green
hill, red roofs and towers and domes, showing out of the trees-- It is
very high but very steep and the procession wound in and out like a
fairy picture-- I sat on the top of the hill, looking down it to the
Danube, which separates Buda from Pest-- The Emperor sat across the
square about 75 yards from our tribune in the balcony of his palace.
We sat in the Palace yard and the procession passed and turned in front
of us-- There were about 1,500 nobles, each dressed to suit himself, in
costumes that had descended for generations--of brocade, silk, fur, and
gold and silver cloth-- Each costume averaged, with the trappings of
the horse, 5,000 dollars.  Some cost $1,000, some  $15,000.  Some wore
complete suits of chain armor, with bearskins and great black eagle
feathers on their spears just as they were when they invaded Rome--
Others wore gold chain armor and leopard or wolf skins and their horses
were studded with turquoises and trappings of gold and silver and
smothered in silver coins-- It would have been ridiculous if they had
not been the real thing in every detail and if you had not known how
terribly in earnest the men were.  There is no other country in the
world where men change from the most blase and correct of beings, to
fairy princes in tights and feathers and jewelled belts and satin
coats-- They were an hour in passing and each one seemed more beautiful
than the others-- I am very glad I came although I was disappointed at
missing the accident at Moscow.  It must have been more terrible than
Johnstown.  I found the ----s quite converted into the most awful snobs
but the people they worship are as simple and well bred as all gentle
people are and I have had the most delightful time with them.  It is so
small and quiet after Moscow, and instead of being lost in an avalanche
of embassies and suites and missions, I have a distinct personality, as
"the American," which I share with "the" Frenchman and four Englishmen.
We are the only six strangers and they give us the run of all that is
going on-- At night we dine at the most remarkable club in the world,
on the border of the Park, where the best of all the Gypsey musicians
plays for us-- The music is alone worth having come to hear, and the
dear souls who play it, having been told that I like it follow me all
around the terrace and sit down three feet away and fix their eyes on
you, and then proceed to pull your nerves and heart out of you for an
hour at a time-- One night a man here dipped a ten thousand franc note
in his champagne and pasted it on the leader's violin and bowed his
thanks, and the leader bowed in return and the next morning sent him
the note back in an envelope, saying that the compliment was worth more
than the money-- The leader's name is Berchey and the Hungarians have
never allowed him to leave the country for fear he would not be allowed
to come back-- He is a fat, half drunken looking man, with his eyes
full of tears half the time he plays.  He looks just like a setter dog
and he is so terribly in earnest that when he fixes me with his eyes
and plays at me, the court ladies all get up and move their chairs out
of his way just as though he were a somnambulist--

I leave here Wednesday and reach Paris Friday MORNING the eleventh--
You must try to meet me at the Cafe de la Paix at half past nine-- Wait
in the corner room if you don't wish to sit outside and as soon as I
get washed I will join you for coffee.  It will be fine to see you
again and to be done with jumping about from hotel to hotel and to be
able to read the signs and to know how to ask for food.  Russian,
German and Hungarian have made French seem like my mother tongue--

DICK.




CHAPTER X

CAMPAIGNING IN CUBA AND GREECE

In December, 1896, Richard and Frederic Remington, the artist, were
commissioned by the New York Journal to visit Cuba which was then at
war with Spain.  It was their intention to go from Key West in the
Vamoose, a very fast but frail steam-launch, and to make a landing at
some uninhabited point on the Cuban coast.  After this their plans seem
to have been to trust to luck and the kindliness of the revolutionists.
After waiting for some time at Key West for favorable weather, they at
last started out on a dark night to make the crossing.  A few hours
after the Vamoose had left Key West a heavy storm arose--apparently
much too violent for the slightly built launch.  The crew struck and
the captain finally refused to go on to Cuba and put back to Key West.
Shortly after this Remington and my brother reached Havana by a more
simple and ostentatious route.  This was my brother's first effort as a
war correspondent, and I presume it was this fact and the very
indefiniteness of the original plan that caused his mother and father
so much uneasiness.  And, indeed, it did prove eventually a hazardous
exploit.


way to Key West.

December 19, 1896.

DEAR MOTHER:

I hope you won't be cross with me for going off and not letting you
know, but I thought it was better to do it that way as there was such
delay in our getting started.  I am going to Cuba by way of Key West
with Frederic Remington and Michaelson, a correspondent who has been
there for six months.  We are to be taken by the Vamoose the fastest
steam yacht made to Santa Clara province where the Cubans will meet us
and take us to Gomez.  We will stay a month with him, the yacht calling
for copy and sketches once a week, and finally for us in a month.  I
get all my expenses and The Journal pays me  $3,000 for the month's
work.  The Harper's Magazine also takes a story at six hundred dollars
and Russell will reprint Remington's sketches and my story in book
form, so I shall probably clear $4,000 in the next month or six weeks.
I was a week in getting information on the subject so I know all about
it from the men who have just been there and I want you to pay
attention to what I tell you they told me and not to listen to any
stray visitor who comes in for tea and talks without any tact or
knowledge.  There is no danger in the trip except the problem of
getting there and getting away again, and that is now removed by The
Journal's yacht.  I would have gone earlier had any of the periodicals
that asked me to go shown me any way to get there-- THERE IS NO FEVER
THIS TIME OF YEAR and as you know fever never touches me.  It got all
the others in Central America and never worried me at all.  There is no
danger of getting shot, as the province into which we go, the Santa
Clara province, is owned and populated and patrolled by the Cubans.  It
is no more Spanish than New Jersey and the Spaniards cannot get in
there.  We have the strongest possible letters from the Junta, and I
have from Lamont, Bayard and Olney and credentials in every language.
We will sit around the Gomez camp and send messengers back to the
coast.  It is a three days trip and as Gomez may be moving from place
to place you may not hear from us for a month and we may not hear from
you but remember it was a much longer time than that before you heard
from me when I went to Honduras.  Also keep in mind that I am going as
a correspondent only and must keep out of the way of fighting and that
I mean to do so, as Chamberlain says we want descriptive stories not
brave deeds-- Major Flint who has arranged the trip for us was down
there with Maceo as a correspondent.  He saw six fights and never shot
off his gun once because as he said it was not his business to kill
people and he has persuaded me that he is right, so I won't do anything
but look on-- I have bought at The Journal's expense a fifty dollar
field glass which is a new invention and the best made.  I have marked
it so that you can see a man five miles off and as soon as I see him I
mean to begin to ride or run the other way--no one loves himself more
than I do so you leave me to take care of myself.  I wish I could give
you any idea of the contempt the four returned correspondents who
talked to me, have for the Spaniards.  They have seen them shoot 2,500
rounds without hitting men at 200 yards and they run away if the enemy
begins on them first.  However, you trust to Richard-- We have a fine
escort arranged for us and Michaelson speaks Spanish perfectly and has
been six months scouting over the country.

DICK.


KEY West, December 26, 1896.

DEAR FAMILY:

I got your letters late last night and they made me pretty solemn.  It
is an awfully solemn thing to have people care for you like that and to
care for them as I do.  I can't tell you how much I love you.  You
don't know how much the pain of worrying you for a month has meant to
me, but I have talked it all out with myself, and left it to God and I
am sure I am doing right.  As Mrs. Crown said, "There's a whole
churchful up here praying for you," and I guess that will pull me
through.  Of course, dear, dear Mother thought she was cross with me.
She could not be cross with me, and her letter told me how much she
cared, that was all, and made me be extra careful.  But I need not
promise you to be careful.  You have an idea I am a wild,
filibustering, hot-headed young man.  I am not.  I gave the guides to
understand their duty was to keep us out of danger if we had to walk
miles to avoid it.  We are men of peace, going in, as real estate
agents and coffee-planters and drummers are going in on every steamer,
to attend to our especial work and get out again quick.  I have just as
strong a prejudice against killing a man as I have against his killing
me.

Lots and lots of love.  Don't get scared if you don't hear for a month,
although we will try to get our stories back once a week, but you know
we are at the convenience of the Cubans who will pocket our despatches
and money and not take the long trip back.  Thank dear Dad for his
letter full of good advice.  It was excellent.  Remington and Michelson
are good men and I like them immensely.  Already we are firm friends.

Love,




KEY WEST--January 1, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:

As you will know by my telegram we are either off on a safe sea going
boat or waiting for one.  There is no turning back from here and the
only reason I thought of doing so was the knowledge of the way you
would suffer and worry.  I argued it out that it was selfish in me to
weigh my getting laughed at and paragraphed as the war correspondent
that always Turned Back against a month of uneasiness for you, but
later I saw I could not do it much as I love you for the element of
danger to me is non-existent; it is merely an exciting adventure and
you will have to believe me and not worry but be a Spartan mother.  I
would not count being laughed at and the loss of my own self respect if
I really thought there was great danger, but I do not.  You will not
lose me and if I go now I can sit still next time and say "I have done
better things than that."  If I had not gone it would have meant that I
would have had to have done just that much harder a stunt next time to
make people forget that I had failed in this one.  Now do cheer up and
believe in the luck of Richard Harding Davis and the British Army.  We
have carte blanche from The Journal to buy or lease any boat on the
coast and I rocked them for $1000 in advance payment because of the
delay over the Vamoose.

I am so happy at thinking I am going, I could not have faced anyone had
I not, although we had nothing to do with the failure, we tried to
cross fairly in the damn tub and it was her captain who put back.  I
lay out on the deck and cried when he refused to go ahead, we had
waited so long.  The Cubans and Remington and Michelson had put on all
their riding things but fortunately I had not and so was spared that
humiliation.  What I don't know about the Fine Art of Filibustering now
is unnecessary.  I find many friends of my Captain Boynton or "Capt.
Burke."  Tonight the officers of the Raleigh give me a grand dinner at
which I wear a dress suit and make speeches--they are the best chaps I
ever met in the Navy.  Lots of love and best wishes to Dad and to Nora
for a happy, happy New Year.  You know me and you know my conscience
but it would not let me go back in order to save you anxiety so you
won't think me selfish.  God bless you.

DICK.


KEY WEST, January 2nd, 1897.

DEAR FAMILY:

I have learned here that the first quality needed to make a great
filibuster is Patience, it is not courage, or resources or a knowledge
of the Cuban Coast line, it is patience.  Anybody can run a boat into a
dark bayou and dump rifles on the beach and scurry away to sea again
but only heroes can sit for a month on a hotel porch or at the end of a
wharf, and wait.  That is all we do and that is my life at Key West.  I
get up and half dress and take a plunge in the bay and then dress fully
and have a greasy breakfast and then light a huge Key West cigar, price
three cents and sit on the hotel porch with my feet on a rail-- Nothing
happens after that except getting one's boots polished as the two
industries of this place are blacking boots and driving cabs.  I have
two boys to black mine at the same time every morning and pay the one
who does his the better of the two-- It generally ends in a fight so
that affords diversion-- Then a man comes along, any man, and says,
"Remmington's looking for you" and I get up and look for Remington.
There is only a triangle of streets where one can find him and I call
at "Josh" Curry's first and then at Pendleton's News Store and read all
the back numbers of the Police Gazette for the hundredth time and then
call here at the Custom House and then look in at the Cable office,
where Michaelson lives sending telegrams about anything or nothing and
that brings me back to the hotel porch again, where I have my boots
shined once more and then go into mid-day dinner.  In the meanwhile
Remington is looking for me a hundred yards in the rear.  He generally
gets to "Josh's" as I leave the Custom House-- In the afternoon I study
Spanish out of a text book and at three take a bicycle ride, at five I
call at the garrison to take tea with the doctor and his wife, who is
sweeter than angel's ever get to be with a miniature angel of a baby
called Martha.  I wait until retreat is sounded and the gun is fired at
sunset and having commented unfavorably on the way the soldiers let the
flag drop on the grass instead of catching it on the arms as a
bluejacket does, I ride off to the bay for another bath-- Then I take
the launch to the Raleigh and dine with the officers and rejoice in the
clean fresh paint and brass and decks and the lights and black places
of a great ship of war, than which nothing is more splendid.  We sit on
the quarter-deck and smoke and play the guitar and I go home again, in
time for bed.  I vary this programme occasionally by spending the
morning on the end of a wharf watching another man fish and reading old
novels and the "Lives of Captain Walker" and "Captain Fry of the
Virginius," two great books from each of which I am going to write a
short story like the one of the Alamo or of the Jameson Raid-- The life
of Walker I found on the Raleigh and the life of Captain Fry with all
the old wood cuts and the newspaper comments of the time at a book
store here.  I don't know when we shall get away but it is no use
kicking about it, Michaelson is doing all he can and the new tug will
be along in a week anyway.  I shall be so glad to get to Cuba that I
will dance with glee.

DICK.


MATANZAS, January 15th, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:

I sent you a note by Remington which he will mail in the States-- From
here I go to Sagua La Grande.  It is on the northern coast.  I think
from there I shall cross over to Cienfuegos on the Southern coast and
then if I can catch a steamer go to Santiago to see my old friends, at
the Juraqua mines and MacWilliams' ore road and "the Palms"--
Everywhere I am treated well on account of Weyler's order and I am
learning a great deal and talking very little, my Spanish being bad.
There is war here and no mistake and all the people in the fields have
been ordered in to the fortified towns where they are starving and
dying of disease.  Yesterday I saw the houses of these people burning
on both sides of the track-- They gave shelter to the insurgents and so
very soon they found their houses gone.  I am so relieved at getting
old Remington to go as though I had won $5000.  He was a splendid
fellow but a perfect kid and had to be humored and petted all the time.
I shall if I have luck be through with this in a few weeks but it has
had such a set back at the start that I am afraid it can never make a
book and I doubt if I can write a decent article even.  I am so anxious
not to keep you worrying any longer than is necessary and so I am
hurrying along taking only a car window view of things.  Address me
care of Consul General Lee, Havana and confine your remarks to what is
going on at home.  I know what is going on here.  I don't believe half
I hear but I am being slowly converted.  Remington is more excitable
than I am, so don't misunderstand if he starts in violently.  I am
getting details and verifying things.  He is right on a big scale but
every one has lied so about this island that I do not want to say
anything I do not believe is true.  This is a beautiful little city and
after Jaruco, where we slept two days ago, it is Paris.  There we slept
off the barnyard and cows and chickens walked all over the floor and
fleas all over us.  It was like Honduras only filthier.  Speaking of
Paris, tell the Kid I expect to go over to him soon after I return to
New York.

of love.

DICK.


CARDENAS--North Coast of Cuba.

January 16th, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:

It is very funny not knowing what sort of a place you are to sleep in
next and taking things out of a grab bag, as it were-- In Europe you
can always guess what the well known towns will give you for you have a
guide book, but here it is all luck.  Matanzas was a pretty city but
the people were awful, the hotel was Spanish and the proprietor
insolent, though I was spending more of Willie Hearst's money than all
of the officers spend in a week, the Consul could not talk English or
Spanish, he said he hadn't come there "to go to school to no Spaniard"
and he gloried in the fact he had been there three years without
knowing a word of the language.  His vice-Consul was worse and
everything went wrong generally.  Every one I met was an Alarmist and
that is polite for liar.  They asked Remington if he was the man who
manufactured the rifles and gave us the Iowa Democrat to read.  To
night I reached here after a six hours ride through blazing fields of
sugar cane and stopped on my way to the hotel to ask the Consul when
the next boat went to Saqua la Grande-- I had no letter of introduction
to him as I had to the Matanzas consul, but as soon as he saw my card
he got out of his chair and shook hands again and was as hearty and
well bred and delightful as Charley himself and unlike Chas he did not
ask me 14 francs for looking on him.  He is out now chasing around to
get me a train for to-morrow.  But I won't go to-morrow.  My hotel
looks on the plaza and the proprietor and the whole suite of attendants
are my slaves.  It is just as different as can be.  My interpreter does
it, he calls himself MY VALET, although I point out to him that two
shirts and twelve collars do not constitute a wardrobe even with a
rubber coat thrown in.  But he likes to play at my being a
distinguished stranger and I can't say I object.  Only when you
remember the way I was invited to see Cuba and expected to see it, and
now the way I am seeing it from car windows with A VALET.  What would
the new school of yellow kid journalists say if they knew that.  For
the first time on this trip I have wished you were both with me, that
was to night.  I never see anything really beautiful but that it
instantly makes me feel selfish and wish you could see it too.  It has
happened again and again and to night I wish you could be here with me
on this balcony.  The town runs down a slope to the bay and in the
middle of it is the Plaza with me on the balcony which lets out of my
sleeping room-- "the room" so the proprietor tells me, "reserved only
for the Capitain General." It is just like the description in that
remarkable novel of mine where Clay and Alice sit on the balcony of the
restaurant.  I have the moonlight and the Cathedral with the open doors
and the bronze statue in the middle and the royal palms moving in the
breeze straight from the sea and the people walking around the plaza
below.  If it was in any way as beautiful as this Clay and Alice would
have ended the novel that night.

I got a grand lot of letters to-day which Otto, my interpreter brought
back from Havana after having conducted Remington there in safety.  I
must say you are writing very cheerfully now, but I don't wonder you
worried at first but now that I am a commercial traveller with an order
from Weyler which does everything when I find it necessary, you really
must not worry any more but just let me continue on my uneventful
journey and then come home.  I shall have been gone so long and my
friends, judging from Russell and Dana and Irene's letters, will be so
glad to see me, that they will have forgotten I went out to do other
things than coast around in trains.  As a matter of fact this is a
terribly big problem and most difficult to get the truth of, I find
myself growing to be the opposite of the alarmist, whatever that is,
although you would think the picturesque and dramatic and exciting
thing would be the one I would rather believe because I want to believe
it, but I find that that is not so, I see a great deal on both sides
and I do not believe half I am told.  As we used to say at college, "it
is against history," and it is against history for men to act as I am
told they are acting here-- They show me the pueblo huddled together
around the fortified towns, living in palm huts but I know that they
have always lived in palm huts, the yellow kid reporters don't know
that or consider it, but send off word that the condition of the people
is terrible, that they have only leaves to cover them, and it sounds
very badly.  That is an instance of what I mean.  In a big way there is
no doubt that the process going on here is one of extermination and
ruin.  Two years ago the amount  of sugar shipped from the port of
Matanzas to the U. S. was valued at 11 millions a year.  This last year
just over shows that sugar to the amount of  $800,000 was sent out.  In
'94, 154 vessels touched at Matanzas on their way to America.  In '95
there were 80 and in '96 there are 16.  I always imagined that houses
were destroyed during a war because they got in the way of cannon balls
or they were burned because they might offer shelter to the enemy, but
here they are destroyed, with the purpose of making the war horrible
and hurrying up the end.  The insurgents began first by destroying the
sugar mills, some of which were worth millions of dollars in machinery,
and now the Spaniards are burning the homes of the people and herding
them in around the towns to starve out the insurgents and to leave them
without shelter or places to go for food or to hide the wounded.  So
all day long where ever you look you see great heavy columns of smoke
rising into this beautiful sky above the magnificent palms the most
noble of all palms, almost of all trees-- It is the most beautiful
country I have ever visited.  I had no recollection of how beautiful it
was or else I had not the knowledge of other places with which to
compare it.  Nothing out of the imagination can approach it in its
great waterfalls and mossy rocks and grand plains and forests of white
pillars with plumes waving above them.  Only man is vile here and it is
cruel to see the walls of the houses with blind eyes, with roofs gone
and gardens burned, every church but one that I have seen was a
fortress with hammocks swung from the altars and rude barricades thrown
up around the doorways-- If this is war I am of the opinion that it is
a senseless wicked institution made for soldiers, lovers and
correspondents for different reasons, and for no one else in the world
and it is too expensive for the others to keep it going to entertain
these few gentlemen-- I have seen very little of it yet and I probably
won't see much more, but I have seen all I want.  Remington had his
mind satisfied even sooner--but then he is an alarmist and exaggerates
things-- The men who wear the red badge of courage, I don't feel sorry
for, they have their reward in their bloody bandages and the little
cross on their tunic but those you meet coming back sick and dying with
fever are the ones that make fighting contemptible--poor little
farmers, poor little children with no interest in Cuba or Spain's right
to hold it, who have been sent out to die like ants before they have
learned to hold a mauser, and who are going back again with the beards
that have grown in the field hospitals on their cheeks and their eyes
hollow, and too weak to move or speak.  Six of them died while I was in
Jaroco, a town as big as Marion and that had been the average for two
months, think of that, six people dying in Marion every day through
July and August-- I didn't stay in that town any longer than the train
did-- Well I have been writing editorials here instead of cheering you
up but I guess I'm about right and when I see a little more I'll tell
it over again to The Journal-- It is not as exciting reading as deeds
of daring by our special correspondent and I haven't changed my name or
shaved my eyebrows or done anything the other men have done but I
believe I am getting near the truth.  They have shut off provisions
going or coming from the towns, they have huddled hundreds of people
who do not know what a bath means around these towns, and this is going
to happen-- As soon as the rains begin the yellow fever and smallpox
will set in and all vessels leaving Cuban ports will be quarantined and
the island will be one great plague spot.  The insurgents who are in
the open fields will live and the soldiers will die for their officers
know nothing of sanitation or care nothing.  The little Consul has just
been here to see me and we have had a long talk and I got back at him.
He told me he had seen the Franco-German war as a correspondent of The
Tribune and I asked him if he had ever met another correspondent of The
Tribune at that time a German student named Hans who cabled the story
of the battle of Gravellote and who Archibald Forbes says was the first
correspondent to use the cable.  The Consul who looks like William D.
Howells wriggled around in his chair and said "I guess you mean me but
I was not a German student, I was born and raised in Philadelphia and
Forbes got my name wrong, it is Hance."  So then I got up and shook
hands with him in my turn and told him I had always wanted to meet that
correspondent and did not expect to do so in Cardenas, on the coast of
Cuba.

Thank you all for your letters.  I am glad you liked the Jameson book.
I thought you knew I was a F. R. G. S.  It was George Curzon proposed
me and as he is a gold medallist of the Society it was easy getting in.
Lots of love.

DICK.


Richard returned to New York from Cuba in February, 1897, but the
following month started for Florence to pay me a long-promised visit.
On his way he stopped for a few days in London and Paris.



ABASSADE DES ETATS-UNIS
  59 Rue Galilee,
    Paris, April 1st, 1897.

DEAR FAMILY:

I got over here to-day after the heaviest weather I ever tackled on
this channel.  Stephen Crane came with me.  I gave him a lunch on
Wednesday.  Anthony Hope, McCarthy, Harold Frederic and Barrie came.
Sir Evelyn Wood instead of coming was detained at the war office and
sent instead a lance Sergeant on horseback with a huge envelope marked
"On Her Majesty's Service," which was to be delivered into my hands--
The entire Savoy was upset and it was generally supposed that war had
been declared and that I was being ordered to the front-- The whole
hotel hung over us until I had receipted for the package and the
soldier had saluted and clanked away.  I gave Crane the letter as a
souvenir.  I also saw Seymour Hicks' first night and recognized 15
American songs in it.

The London Times offered me the position of correspondent on the Greek
frontier.  Every one in London thought it an enormous compliment and
Harold Frederic, Ralph, Ballard Smith and the rest were very envious.
I told them I could not go, but I was glad to have had the compliment
paid me.  Barrie has made out a scenario of the "Soldiers" for dramatic
purposes and has asked the Haymarket management to consider it.  So,
that I guess that it must be good--

So, I also guess I had better finish it-- I leave for Florence to
night.  I am having a fine, fine time and I am so glad you are all well.

Lots of love,

DICK.


Of the many happy days we have spent together, I do not believe there
were any much more happy than the three weeks Richard remained with me.
It was his first long visit to Italy and from the day of his arrival he
loved the old town and its people who gave him a most friendly welcome.
He had come at a time when Florence was at its best, its narrow quaint
streets filled with sunshine and thronged with idling natives and the
scurrying tourists that always came with the first days of spring.  The
Cascine and the pink-walled roads of the environs were ablaze with wild
roses and here, after his rather strenuous experience in Cuba, Richard
gave himself up to long days of happy idleness.  Together we took
voyages of discovery to many of the little walled and forgotten towns
where the tourists seldom set foot.  Once we even wandered so far as
Monte Carlo, where my brother tried very hard to break the bank and did
not succeed.  But the Richard Harding Davis luck did not fail him
completely and I remember I greatly envied him the huge pile of gold
and notes that represented his winnings and which we did our very best
to spend before we left the land of the Prince of Monaco.  However,
having had his first taste of war, Richard felt that he must leave the
peace and content of Florence to see how the Greeks, with whom he had
much sympathy, were faring with their enemies the Turks.  As it
happened, this expedition proved but a short interruption, and in less
than a month he was once more back with his new-found friends in
Florence.


April 28, 1897

On the Way to Patras on a Steamer.

DEAR FAMILY:

It has been a week since I wrote you last, when I sent you the
Inauguration article.  Since then I have been having the best time I
ever had any place ALONE.  I have had more fun with a crowd, but never
have been so happy by myself.  What I would have been had I taken some
other chap with me I cannot imagine.  But the people of this part of
Greece have been so kind that I cannot say I have been alone.  I never
met with strangers anywhere who were so hospitable, so confiding and
polite.  After that slaughter-yard and pest place of Cuba, which is
much more terrible to me now than it was when I was there, or before I
had seen that war can be conducted like any other evil of civilization,
this opera bouffe warfare is like a duel between two gentlemen in the
Bois.  Cuba is like a slave-holder beating a slave's head in with a
whip.  I am a war correspondent only by a great stretch of the
imagination; I am a peace correspondent really, and all the fighting I
have seen was by cannon at long range.  (I was at long range, not the
cannon.)  I am doing this campaign in a personally conducted sense with
no regard to the Powers or to the London Times.  I did send them an
article called "The Piping Times of War."  If they do not use it I
shall illustrate it with the photos I have taken and sell it, for five
times the sum they would give, to the Harpers who are ever with us.  As
I once said in a noted work, "Greece, Mrs. Morris, restores all your
lost illusions."  For the last week I have been back in the days of
Conrad, the Corsair, and "Oh, Maid of Athens, ere We Part."  I have
been riding over wind-swept hills and mountains topped with snow, and
with sheep and goats and wild flowers of every color spreading for
acres, and in a land where every man dresses by choice like a grand
opera brigand, and not only for photographic purposes.  I have been on
the move all the time, chasing in the rear of armies that turn back as
soon as I approach and apologize for disappointing me of a battle, or
riding to the scene of a battle that never comes off, or hastening to a
bombardment that turns out to be an attack on an empty fort.

I live on brown bread and cheese and goat's milk and sleep like a log
in shepherds' huts.  It is so beautiful that I almost grudge the night.
Nora and Mother could take this trip as safely as a regiment and would
see things out of fairyland.  And such adventures!  Late in life I am
at last having adventures and honors heaped upon me.  I was elected a
captain of a band of brigands who had been watching a mountain pass for
a month, and as it showed no signs of running away had taken to dancing
on the green.  I caught them at this innocent pastime and they allowed
me to photograph them and give them wine at eight cents a quart which
we drank out of a tin stovepipe.  They drank about four feet of
stovepipe or thirty-six cents' worth, then they danced and sang for me
in a circle, old men and boys, then drilled with their carbines, and I
showed them my revolver and field-glasses and themselves in the finder
of the camera; and when I had to go they took me on their shoulders and
marched me around waving their rifles.  Then the old men kissed me on
the cheek and we all embraced and they wept, and I felt as badly as
though I were parting from fifty friends.  They told my guide that if I
would come back they would get fifty more "as brave as they" and I
could be captain.  I could not begin to tell you all the amusing things
that have happened in this one week.  I did not want to come at all,
only a stern sense of duty made me.  For I wanted to write the play in
Charley's gilded halls and get to Paris and London.  But I can never
cease rejoicing that I took this trip.  And it will make the book, "A
Year from a Reporter's Diary," as complete as it can be.  That was why
I came.  Now I have the Coronation of the Czar, the Millennial at
Hungary, the Inauguration at Washington, the Queen's Jubilee, the War
in Cuba, and the Greco-Turkish War.  That is a good year's work and I
mean to loaf after it.  You will laugh and say that that is what I
always say, but if you knew how I had to kick myself out of Florence
and the Cascine to come here you would believe me. I want a rest and I
am cutting this very short.

Don't fail to cut anything Dad and Mother don't like out of the
Inauguration article.  You will have me with you this winter on my
little bicycle and going to dances and not paying board to anyone.
Remember how I used to threaten to go to Greece when the coffee was not
good.  It seems too funny now, for I never was in a better place, or
had more fun or saw less of war or the signs of war.

DICK.


May 7, 1897.

10 East Twenty-Eighth Street-NIT
  Sponitza.

DEAR CHAS.

This is one of the places out of Phroso, but as you never read Phroso I
will cut all that-- I hate to say it so soon again but this is the most
beautiful country to travel over I have seen-- It is a fairy theatrical
grand opera country where everybody dresses in petticoats and gold
braided vests and carry carbines to tend sheep with-- I rode from Santa
Maura (see map) to a spot opposite Prevesa where they said there was
going to be bombarding-- There was not of course but I had I think the
most beautiful ride of my life.  I was absolutely happy--little lambs
bleated and kids butted each other and peasants in fur cloaks without
sleeves and in tights like princes sat on rocks and played pipes and
the sky was blue, the mountains covered with snow and the fields and
hills full of purple bushes and yellow and blue flowers and sheep--
There was a cable station of yellow adobe.  It was the only building
and it looked across at Prevesa but nobody bombarded.  The general gave
me cognac and the cable operator played a guitar for me and the preyor
sang a fine bass, the corporal not to be out done gave me chocolate and
the army stood around in the sun and joined in the conversation
correcting the general and each other and taking off their hats to all
the noble sentiments we toasted.  It was just like a comic opera.
After a while when I had finished a fine hunck of cheese and hard eggs
and brown bread I took a photograph of the General and the cable
operator and the officer with the bass voice and half of the army-- The
other half was then sent to escort me to this place.  It walked and I
rode and there were many halts for drinks and cigarettes.  They all ran
after a stray colt and were lost for some time but we re-mobilized and
advanced with great effect into this town.  I was here taken in charge
by at least fifty sailors and as many soldiers and comic opera brigands
in drawers and white petticoats, who conducted me to a house on the
hill where the innkeeper brought me a live chicken to approve of for
dinner.  Then the mayor of the town turned up in gold clothes and
Barrison Sister skirts and said the General had telegraphed about me
and that I was his-- The innkeeper wept and said he had seen me first
and the chorus of soldiers, sailors and brigands all joined in.  I kept
out of it but I knew the Mayor would win and he did.  Then we went out
to a man-of-war the size of the Vagabond and were solemnly assured
there would be bombarding of Prevesa to-morrow-- I go to sleep in that
hope.  We leave here at seven crossing the river and ride after the
Greeks who are approaching Prevesa from the land side while the
men-of-war bombard it from the river.  At least that is what they say.
I think it is the mildest war on both sides I ever heard of and I
certainly mean to be a Times correspondent next time I play at going to
war-- After being insulted and frightened to death all over Cuba, this
is the pleasantest picnic I was ever on-- They seriously apologized for
not bombarding while I was there and I said not to mention it-- With
lots of love, old man, and to the family

DICK.


FLORENCE

May 16, 1897.

DEAR FAMILY:

Here I am safe and sound again in the old rooms in Florence.  I was
gone twenty-three days and was traveling nineteen of them, walking,
riding; in sailboats, in the cars, and on steamers.  I have had more
experiences and adventures than I ever had before in three months and
quite enough to last me for years.

After my happy ride through Turkey and the retreat of the Greek army in
Arta, of which I wrote you last, I have been in Thessaly where I saw
the two days' battle of Velestinos from the beginning up to the end.
It was the one real battle of the war and the Greeks fought well from
the first to the last.  I left Athens on the 29th of April with John
Bass, a Harvard graduate, and a most charming and attractive youth who
is, or was, in charge of the Journal men; Stephen Crane being among the
number.  He seems a genius with no responsibilities of any sort to
anyone, and I and Bass left him at Velestinos after traveling with him
for four days.  Crane went to Volo, as did every other correspondent,
leaving Bass and myself in Velestinos.  As the villagers had run away,
we burglarized the house of the mayor and made it our habitation while
the courier hunted for food.  It was like "The Swiss Family Robinson,"
and we rejoiced over the discovery of soap and tablecloths and stray
knives and forks, just as though we had been cast on a desert island.
Bass did the cooking and I laid the table and washed up and made the
beds, which were full of fleas.  But we had been sleeping on chairs and
on the floor for a week so we did not mind much.

The second day we were awakened by cannon and you can imagine our joy
and excitement.  We had it all to ourselves for eight hours, as it took
the other correspondents that long to arrive.  It was an artillery and
infantry battle and about 20,000 men were engaged on both sides.  The
Greeks fought from little trenches on the hills back of the town and
the Turks advanced across a great green prairie.  It was very long
range and only twice did they get to within a quarter of a mile of our
trenches.  Bass and I went all over the Greek lines, for you were just
as safe in one place as in another, which means that it wasn't safe
anywhere, so we gave up considering that and followed the fight as best
we could from the first trench, which was the only one that gave an
uninterrupted view of the Turkish forces.  It was a brilliantly clear
day but opened with a hail storm, which enabled the Turks to crawl up
half a mile in the sudden darkness.  It also gave me the worst attack
of sciatica I ever had.  Fortunately, it did not come on badly until I
reached Volo, when it suddenly took hold of me so that I could not
walk.  The trenches were wet with the rain and we had no clothes to
change to, and two more showers kept us more or less wet all day.  We
had a fine view of everything and I learned a lot.

We were under a heavy fire for thirteen hours and certainly had some
very close escapes.  At times the firing was so fierce that if you had
raised your arm above your head, the hand would have been instantly
torn off.  We had to lie on our stomachs with our chins in the dirt and
not so much as budge.  This was when the Turkish fire happened to be
directed on our trench.  At such times all the other trenches would
fire so as to draw the attack away, and we would have to wait until it
was over.  The shells sounded like the jarring sound of telegraph wires
when one hits the pole they hang from with a stone; and when the shells
were close they sounded like the noise made by two trains passing in
opposite directions when the wind is driven between the cars.  The
bullets were much worse than the shells as you could always hear them
coming, and the bullets slipped up and passed you in a sneaking way
with a noise like rustling silk, or if some one had torn a silk
handkerchief with a sharp pull.  One shell struck three feet from me
and knocked me over with the dirt and stones and filled my nose and
mouth with pebbles.  I went back and dug it out of the ground while it
was still hot and have it as a souvenir.  I swore terribly at the
bullets and Bass used to grin in a sickly way.  It made your hair creep
when they came very close.  One man next me got a shot through the
breast while he was ramming his cleaner down the barrel, and there were
three killed within the limits of our fifty yards.  We could not get
back because there was a cross fire that swept a place we had to pass
through, just about the way the wind comes around the City Hall in the
times of a blizzard.  We called it Dead Man's Curve, after that at
Fourteenth Street and Union Square, because it was sprinkled with dead
ammunition, mules and soldiers.  We came through it the first time
without knowing what we were getting into and we had no desire to go
back again.  So we waited until the sun set.  I took some of the finest
photographs and probably the only ones ever taken of a battle at such
close range.  Whenever the men fired, I would shoot off the camera and
I expect I have some pretty great pictures.  Bass took some of me so if
there is any question as to whether I was at the Coronation, there will
be none as to whether I was at Velestinos.

Our house was hit with two shells and bullets fell like the gentle rain
from heaven all over the courtyard, so we would have been no safer
there than behind the trenches.  We sent off the first account of the
battle written by anybody by midday, and stayed on until the next day
at four when the place was evacuated in good order because, as usual,
the Crown Prince was running away--from Pharsalia this time.

They say in Greece "Lewes, the peasant, won the race from Marathon, but
Constantine the prince, won the race from Larissa."

I was all right until I got to Volo when my right leg refused
absolutely to do its act and I had to be carried on a donkey.  A Greek
thought I looked funny sitting groaning on the little donkey; which I
did--I looked ridiculous.  So he laughed, and Bass and a French
journalist batted him over the face and left me clinging to the
donkey's neck and howling to them to come back and hold me up.  But
they preferred to fight, and a policeman came along and arrested the
unhappy Greek and beat him over the head, just for luck, and marched
him off to jail, just for laughing.

They took me to the hospital ship which was starting, and I came to
Athens that way with one hundred and sixteen wounded; the man on my
right had his ankles gone and the man on the left had a bullet in his
side.  They groaned all night and so did I.  Then when the sun rose
they sang, which was worse.  I never saw anything more beautiful than
the red-cross nurses, and I guess that is the most beautiful picture I
shall ever see--those sweet-faced girls in blue and white bending over
the dirty frightened little peasant boys and taking care of their
wounds.  I made love to all of them and asked three to marry me.  I was
in bed for two days after I got to Athens but had a fine time, as all
the officers from the San Francisco, from the admiral down, came to see
me, and the minister, consul and the rest did all that could have been
done.  I am now all right and was bicycling in the dear old Cascine
this morning.  On the whole it was a most successful trip.  Sylvester
Scovel and Phillips of The World arrived just as it was all over, and
so Bass and I are about the only two Americans who were in it.

The train from Brindisi stopped at Rome on the way back and I went to
see the Pages.  They took me out and showed me Rome by moonlight in one
hour.  It was like a cinematograph.  They are here now and coming to
dinner tonight.  Last night the consul had all our friends to dinner to
welcome me back, and maybe I was not glad.  I had been living on cheese
and brown bread and cold lamb for two weeks, with no tobacco, and
sleeping five hours a night on floors and sofas.  Sometimes the
officers and men fought for food, and we never got anything warm to eat
except occasionally tinned things which we cooked in my kit.  It was
the most satisfactory trip all round I ever had.  I have been twenty
years trying to be in a battle and it will be twenty years more before
I will want to be in another.

On the eighteenth I start for London, stopping one day in Paris to see
the Clarks and Eustises.  It is going to be bigger than the Coronation
for crowds, and Mother need not worry, I shall keep out of it.  The
Minister to Russia sent me word that the Czar's prime minister has
given him my article and that the Czar said thank him very much.  So
that is all right.  Also Hay is to present me to the Prince at the
levee on the 31st of May, and I shall send him a copy, too.  I am
looking forward to London with such joy.  Tell Mother to send me the
Bookbuyer with her article in it.  I have only read the reviews of it,
and they are so enthusiastic that I must have the whole thing quick.
It was such a fine thing to do about Poe, and to give those other two
fetishes the coup de grace.  It reads splendidly and I want it all.
What did Dad think of the Inauguration article?  I send you all my
dearest love and will have lots to tell you when I get back this time.

God bless you all.

DICK.


Richard left Florence the latter part of May, and went to London where
he had made arrangements to report the Queen's Jubilee.  He began his
round of gayeties by being presented at Court.  The Miss Groves and
Miss Wather to whom he refers in the following letter were the clerks
at Cox's hotel.


LONDON, June 2nd, 1897.

DEAR FAMILY:

I was a beautiful sight at the Levee.  I wore a velvet suit made
especially for me but no dearer for that and steel buttons and a
beautiful steel sword and a court hat with silver on the side and silk
stockings that I wore at Moscow and pumps with great buckles.  I was
too magnificent for words and so you would have said.  I waited a long
time in a long hall crowded with generals and sea captains and
highlanders and volunteers and cavalry men and judges and finally was
admitted past a rope and then past another rope and then rushed along
into the throne room where I saw beefeaters and life guardsmen and
chamberlains with white wands and I gave one my card and he read out
"R. H. D. of the United States by the American Ambassador" and then I
bowed to the Prince and Duke of York, Connaught and Edinburgh and to
the American Ambassador and then Henry White and Spencer Eddy, the two
Secretaries and the naval attache all shook hands with me and I went
around in a hansom in the bright sunshine in hopes of finding some one
who would know me.  But no one did so I went to Cox's Hotel and showed
myself to Miss Groves and Miss Wather.  I went on the Terrace yesterday
with the Leiters and at O'Connor's invitation brought them to tea.
Labouchere was there and Dillon just out of jail and it was most
interesting.  I am very, very busy doing nothing and having a fine
time--

DICK.


LONDON, June 21, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:

Words cannot tell at least not unless I am well paid for it what London
is like to-day.  In the first place it is so jammed that no one can
move and it is hung with decorations so that no one can see.  Royal
carriages get stuck just as do the humble drayman or Pickford's Van and
royalties are lodging in cheap hotels with nothing but a couple of
Grenadier's in sentry boxes to show they are any better blooded than
the rest of the lodgers.  I also added to the confusion by giving a
lunch to the Ambassador and Miss Hay in return for the presentation.
Lady Henry and Mrs. Asquith sat on either side of him and Mrs. Clark
had Asquith and Lord Basil Blackwood to talk to-- There was also
Anthony Hope, the beautiful Julia Neilson and her husband Fred Terry
and Lady Edward Cecil and Lord Lester-- It went off fine and the Savoy
people sent in an American Eagle of ice, decorated with American flags
and dripping icy tears from its beak.  It cost me five shillings a head
and looked as though it cost that in pounds-- To night I dine with the
Goulds and then go to a musical where Melba sings, Padewreski plays and
then walk the streets if I can until daybreak as I think of making the
night before the procession the greater part of the story.  I send you
a plan showing my seat which cost me twenty-five dollars, the
advertised price being $125. but there has been a terrible slump in
seats.  Love to dear Dad and Nora.

DICK.



LONDON.
  89 Jermyn Street,

June 25th, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:

The Jubilee turned out to be the easiest spectacle to get at and to get
away from that I ever witnessed.  Experience in choosing a place and
police regulations made it so simple that we went straight to our seats
and got away again without as much trouble as it would have taken to
have gone to a matinee.  The stage management of the thing almost
impressed me more than anything else.  For grandeur and show it about
equalled the procession of the Czar and in many ways it was more
interesting because it was concerned with our own people and with our
own part of the world.  Next to the Queen, Lord Roberts got all of the
applause.  He rode a little white pony that had been with him in six
campaigns and had carried him on his march to Candahar.  It had all the
campaign medals presented to it by the War Department and wore them in
a line on its forehead, and walked just as though he knew what a great
occasion it was.  After Roberts came in popularity a Col. Maurice
Clifford with the Rhodesian Horse in sombrero's and cartridge belts and
khaki suits.  He had lost his arm and was easily recognized.  Wilfred
Laurier the French Premier of Canada and the Lord Mayor were the other
favourites.  The scene in front of St. Paul's was absolutely
magnificent with the sooty pillars behind the groups of diplomats,
bishops and choir boys in white, University men in pink silk gowns, and
soldiers, beef eaters, gentlemen at arms and the two Archbishops.  The
best moment was when the collected troops; negroes, Chinamen, East
Indians, West Indians, African troopers, Canadian Mounted Police,
Australians, Borneo police and English Grenadiers all sang the doxology
together in the beautiful sunshine and under the shadow of that great
facade of black and white marble.  Also when the Archbishop of
Canterbury without any warning suddenly after kissing the Queen's hand
threw up his arm and cried out so that you could have heard him a
hundred yards off "Three Cheers for Her Majesty" and the diplomats, and
foreign rajahs and bishops and Salvation Army captains waved their hats
and mortar boards and the soldiers ran their bearskins and helmets on
their bayonets and spun them around in the air.  The weather was
absolutely perfect and there were no accidents.  Last night the
carriages were allowed to parade the streets and for hours the route
was blocked with omnibuses hired by private parties, coster carts,
private carriages, court carriages and the hansoms.  The procession
formed by these was two hours in going one mile.  They passed my
windows in Jermyn Street for three hours and a party of us sat inside
and guyed the life out of them until one in the morning.  We got very
clever at it finally and very impudent and as the people were only two
yards from us my windows being on a level with the tops of the buses
and as we had a flaring illumination that lit up the street completely
we had lots of fun with them especially with the busses, as we
pretended to believe that the advertisements referred to the people on
the top, and we would ask anxiously which lady was "Lottie Collins" and
which gentleman had been brought up on " Mellin's Food"-- We had even
more fun with the swells coming home from the Gala night at the opera
and hemmed in between costers and Pickford's vans loaded down with
women and children.

They called on us for speeches and matches and segars and we kept the
procession supplied with food and drink.  Nobody got mad and they
answered back but we were prepared with numerous repartees and they
were apparently so surprised by finding a party of ladies and gentlemen
engaged in chaffing court officials that they would forget to reply
until they had moved on.  One bus driver said "Oh, you can larff, cause
your at 'ome.  We are 'unting for Jensen on a North Pole Expedition.
We won't be home for three years yet--" Charley seems very happy and he
got a most hearty welcome.  I shall follow him over.  I do not think I
shall go when he does as that would mean seeing people and getting
settled and I must get the Greek war done by the 12th of July and the
Jubilee by the 15th of August.  I know you will not mind, but I have
been terribly interrupted by the Jubilee and by so many visitors.  They
are running in all the time, so I shall try to get the Greek war
article done before I sail and also have a little peaceful view of
London.  I have seen nothing of it really yet.  It has been like living
in a circus, and moving about on an election night.  I am well as can
be except for occasional twinges of sciatica but I have not had to go
to bed with it and some times it disappears for a week.  A little less
rain and more sun will stop it.  I hope you do not mind my not
returning but we will all be together for many months this Fall and I
really feel that I have not had a quiet moment here for pleasure and
work.  It has been such a rush.  I do wish to see dear Dad.  I am so
very sorry about his being ill, and I hope he is having lots of
fishing.  Love to all at Marion--and God bless you.

RICHARD.


LONDON

July 13, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:

Today Barrie gave a copyright performance of "The Little Minister"
which Maude Adams is to play in the States.  It was advertised by a
single bill in front of the Haymarket Theater and the price of
admission was five guineas.  We took in fifteen guineas, the audience
being Charley Frohman, Lady Craig and a man.  Cyril Maude played the
hero and Brandon Thomas and Barrie the two low comedy parts--two
Scotchmen of Thrums.  I started to play one of them, but as I insisted
on making it an aged negro with songs, Barrie and Frohman got
discouraged and let me play the villain, Lord Rintoul, in which
character I was great.  Maude played his part in five different ways
and dialects so as to see which he liked best, he said.  It was a bit
confusing.  Then one of the actors went up in the gallery and pretended
to be a journalist critic who had sneaked in, and he abused the play
and the actors with the exception of the man who played Whamond
(himself) whom he said he thought showed great promise.  Maude
pretended not to know who he was and it fooled everybody.  Mrs. Barrie
played the gipsy and danced most of the time, which she said was her
conception of the part as it was in the book.  Her husband explained
that this was a play, not a book, but she did not care and danced on
and off.  She played my daughter, and I had a great scene in which I
cursed her, which got rounds of applause.  Lady Lewis's daughters in
beautiful Paquin dresses played Scotch lassies, and giggled in all the
sad parts, and one actress who had made a great success as one of the
"Two Vagabonds" made everybody weep by really trying to act.  At one
time there were five men on the stage all talking Scotch dialect and
imitating Irving at the same time.  It was a truly remarkable
performance.  Ethel Barrymore goes back on Saturday with Drew to play a
French maid in "A Marriage of Convenience."  She is announced to be
engaged to Hope, I see by the papers.  They are not engaged, of course,
but the papers love to make matches.  Look for me as sailing either on
the 31st on the St. Louis or a week later.  With lots and lots of love.

DICK.


In the late summer Richard returned to Marion and from there went to
New York.  However, at this time, the lure of England was very strong
with my brother, and early December found him back in London.


LONDON, December 29th, 1897.

DEAR MOTHER:--

I had a most exciting Christmas, most of which I spent in Whitechapel
in the London Hospital.  I lunched with the Spenders and then went down
with them carrying large packages for distribution to the sick.  I
expected to be terribly bored, but thought I would feel so virtuous
that I would the better enjoy my dinner which I had promised to take
with the McCarthys-- On the contrary, I had the most amusing time and
much more fun than I had later.  The patients seemed only to be playing
sick, and some of them were very humorous and others very pathetic and
I played tin soldiers with some, and distributed rich gifts, other
people had paid for, with a lavish hand.  I also sat on a little girl's
cot and played dolls for an hour.  She had something wrong with her
spine and I wept most of the time, chiefly because she smiled all the
time.  She went asleep holding on to my middle finger like the baby in
"The Luck of Roaring Camp."  There were eighty babies in red flannel
nightgowns buttoned up the back who had pillow fights in honor of the
day and took turns in playing on a barrel organ, those that were strong
and tall enough.  In the next ward another baby in white was dying--
Its mother was a coster girl, seventeen years old, with a big hat and
plumes like those the flower girls wear at Piccadilly Circus.  The baby
was yellow like old ivory and its teeth and gums were blue and it died
while we were watching it.  The mother girl was drinking tea and crying
into it out of red swollen eyes, and twenty feet off one of the red
nightgowned kids was playing "Louisiana Lou" on the barrel organ.  The
nurse put the baby's arms under the sheets and then pulled one up over
its face and took the teacup away from the mother who didn't see what
had happened and I came away while three young nurses were comforting
the girl.  Most of the nurses were very beautiful, and I neglected my
duties as Santa Claus to talk to them.  They would stop talking to get
down on their knees and dust up the floor, which was most embarrassing,
you couldn't very well ask to be let to help.  There was one coster who
had his broken leg in a cage which moved with the leg no matter how
much he tossed.  He was like the man "who sat in jail without his
boots, admiring how the world was made," he spent all his waking hours
in wrapt admiration of the cage-- He said to me "I've been here a
fortnight now, come Monday, and I can't break my leg no how.  Yer can't
do it, that's all-- Yer can twist, and kick, and toss, and it don't do
no good.  Yer jest can't do it-- Now you take notice."  Then he would
kick violently and the cage would run around on trolleys and keep the
broken limb straight.  "See!" he would exclaim, "Wot did I tell you--
Its no use of trying, yer just can't do it.  'ere I've been ten days a
trying and it can't be done."

We had a very fine Christmas dinner just Ethel, the McCarthy's and I.
Fanny, tell Charles, brought in the plum pudding with a sprig of holly
in it and blazing, and after dinner I read them the Jackall-- About
eleven I started to take Ethel to Miss Terry's, who lives miles beyond
Kensington.  There was a light fog.  I said that all sorts of things
ought to happen in a fog but that no one ever did have adventures
nowadays.  At that we rode straight into a bank of fog that makes those
on the fishing banks look like Spring sunshine.  You could not see the
houses, nor the street, nor the horse, not even his tail.  All you
could see were gas jets, but not the iron that supported them.  The
cabman discovered the fact that he was lost and turned around in
circles and the horse slipped on the asphalt which was thick with
frost, and then we backed into lamp-posts and curbs until Ethel got so
scared she bit her under lip until it bled.  You could not tell whether
you were going into a house or over a precipice or into a sea.  The
horse finally backed up a flight of steps, and rubbed the cabby against
a front door, and jabbed the wheels into an area railing and fell down.
That, I thought, was our cue to get out, so we slipped into a well of
yellow mist and felt around for each 'other until a square block of
light suddenly opened in mid air and four terrified women appeared in
the doorway of the house through which the cabman was endeavoring to
butt himself.  They begged us to come in, and we did-- Being Christmas
and because the McCarthy's always call me "King" I had put on all my
decorations and the tin star and I also wore my beautiful fur coat, to
which I have treated myself, and a grand good thing it is, too-- I took
this off because the room was very hot, forgetting about the
decorations and remarked in the same time to Ethel that it would be
folly to try and get to Barkston Gardens, and that we must go back to
the "Duchess's" for the night.  At this Ethel answered calmly "yes,
Duke," and I became conscious of the fact that the eyes of the four
women were riveted on my fur coat and decorations.  At the word "Duke"
delivered by a very pretty girl in an evening frock and with nothing on
her hair the four women disappeared and brought back the children, the
servants, and the men, who were so overcome with awe and excitement and
Christmas cheer that they all but got down on their knees in a circle.
So, we fled out into the night followed by minute directions as to
where "Your Grace" and "Your Ladyship" should turn.  For years, no
doubt, on a Christmas Day the story will be told in that house,
wherever it may be in the millions of other houses of London, how a
beautiful Countess and a wicked Duke were pitched into their front door
out of a hansom cab, and after having partaken of their Christmas
supper, disappeared again into a sea of fog.  The only direction Ethel
and I could remember was that we were to go to the right when we came
to a Church, so when by feeling our way by the walls we finally reached
a church we continued going on around it until we had encircled it five
times or it had encircled us, we were not sure which.  After the fifth
lap we gave up and sat down on the steps.  Ethel had on low slippers
and was shivering and coughing but intensely amused and only scared for
fear she would lose her voice for the first night of "Peter"-- We could
hear voices sometimes, like people talking in a dream, and sometimes
the sound of dance music, and a man's voice calling "Perlice" in a
discouraged way as if he didn't much care whether the police came or
not, but regularly like a fog siren-- I don't know how long we sat
there or how long we might have sat there had not a man with a bicycle
lamp loomed up out of the mist and rescued us.  He had his mother with
him and she said with great pride that her boy could find his way
anywhere.  So, we clung to her boy and followed.  A cabman passed
leading his horse with one of his lamps in his other hand and I turned
for an instant to speak to him and Ethel and her friends disappeared
exactly as though the earth had opened.  So, I yelled after them, and
Ethel said "Here, I am," at my elbow.  It was like the chesire cat that
kept appearing and disappearing until he made Alice dizzy.  We finally
found a link-boy and he finally found the McCarthy's house, and I left
them giving Ethel quinine and whiskey.  They wanted me to stay, but I
could not face dressing, in the morning.  So I felt my way home and
only got lost twice.  The Arch on Constitution Hill gave me much
trouble.  I thought it was the Marble Arch, and hence-- In Jermyn
Street I saw two lamps burning dimly and a voice said, hearing my
footsteps "where am I?  I don't know where I am no more than nothing--"
I told him he was in Jermyn Street with his horse's head about twenty
feet from St. James-- There was a long dramatic silence and then the
voice said-- "Well, I be blowed I thought I was in Pimlico!!!"

This has been such a long letter that I shall have to skip any more.  I
have NO sciatica chiefly because of the fur coat, I think, and I got
two Christmas presents, one from Margaret Fraser and one from the
Duchess of Sutherland-- Boxing Day I took Margaret to the matinee of
the Pantomine and it lasted five hours, until six twenty, then I
dressed and dined with the Hay's and went with them to the Barnum
circus which began at eight and lasted until twelve.  It was a busy day.

Lots of love.

DICK.



LONDON, March 20, 1898.

DEAR MOTHER:

The Nellie Farren benefit was the finest thing I have seen this year
past.  It was more remarkable than the Coronation, or the Jubilee.  It
began at twelve o'clock on Thursday, but at ten o'clock Wednesday
night, the crowd began to gather around Drury Lane, and spent the night
on the sidewalk playing cards and reading and sleeping.  Ten hours
later they were admitted, or a few of them were, as many as the
galleries would hold.  Arthur Collins, the manager of the Drury Lane
and the man who organized the benefit, could not get a stall for his
mother the day before the benefit.  They were then not to be had, the
last having sold for twelve guineas.  I got TWO the morning of the
benefit for three pounds each, and now people believe that I did get
into the Coronation! The people who had stalls got there at ten
o'clock, and the streets were blocked for "blocks" up to Covent Garden
with hansoms and royal carriages and holders of tickets at fifty
dollars apiece.  It lasted six hours and brought in thirty thousand
dollars.  Kate Vaughan came back and danced after an absence from the
stage of twelve years.  Irving recited The Dream of Eugene Aram, Terry
played Ophelia, Chevalier sang Mrs. Hawkins, Dan Leno gave Hamlet,
Marie Tempest sang The Jewel of Asia and Hayden Coffin sang Tommy
Atkins, the audience of three thousand people joining in the chorus,
and for an encore singing "Oh, Nellie, Nellie Farren, may your love be
ever faithful, may your pals be ever true, so God bless you Nellie
Farren, here's the best of luck to you."  In Trial by Jury, Gilbert
played an associate judge; the barristers were all playwrights, the
jury the principal comedians, the chorus girls were real chorus girls
from the Gaiety mixed in with leading ladies like Miss Jeffries and
Miss Hanbury, who could not keep in step.  But the best part of it was
the pantomime.  Ellaline came up a trap with a diamond dress and her
hair down her back and electric lights all over her, and said, "I am
the Fairy Queen," and waved her wand, at which the "First Boy" in the
pantomime said, "Go long, now, do, we know your tricks, you're Ellaline
Terriss"; and the clown said, "You're wrong, she's not, she's Mrs.
Seymour Hicks."  Then Letty Lind came on as Columbine in black tulle,
and Arthur Roberts as the policeman, and Eddy Payne as the clown and
Storey as Pantaloon.

The rest of it brought on everybody.  Sam Sothern played a "swell" and
stole a fish.  Louis Freear, a housemaid, and all the leading men
appeared as policemen.  No one had more than a line to speak which just
gave the audience time to recognize him or her.  The composers and
orchestra leaders came on as a German band, each playing an instrument,
and they got half through the Washington Post before the policemen beat
them off.  Then Marie Lloyd and all the Music Hall stars appeared as
street girls and danced to the music of a hand-organ.  Hayden Coffin,
Plunkett Greene and Ben Davies sang as street musicians and the clown
beat them with stuffed bricks.  After that there was a revue of all the
burlesques and comic operas, then the curtain was raised from the
middle of the stage, and Nellie Farren was discovered seated at a table
on a high stage with all the "legitimates" in frock-coats and walking
dresses rising on benches around her.

The set was a beautiful wood scene well lighted.  Wyndham stood on one
side of her, and he said the yell that went up when the curtain rose
was worse than the rebel yell he had heard in battles.  In front of
her, below the stage, were all the people who had taken part in the
revue, forming a most interesting picture.  There was no one in the
group who had not been known for a year by posters or photographs:
Letty Lind as the Geisha, Arthur Roberts as Dandy Dan.  The French Girl
and all the officers from The Geisha, the ballet girls from the
pantomime, the bareback-riders from The Circus Girl; the Empire
costumes and the monks from La Poupee, and all the Chinese and Japanese
costumes from The Geisha.  Everybody on the stage cried and all the old
rounders in the boxes cried.

It was really a wonderfully dramatic spectacle to see the clown and
officers and Geisha girls weeping down their grease paint.  Nellie
Farren's great song was one about a street Arab with the words:  "Let
me hold your, nag, sir, carry your little bag, sir, anything you please
to give--thank'ee, sir!"  She used to close her hand, then open it and
look at the palm, then touch her cap with a very wonderful smile, and
laugh when she said, "Thank'ee, sir!"  This song was reproduced for
weeks before the benefit, and played all over London, and when the
curtain rose on her, the orchestra struck into it and the people
shouted as though it was the national anthem.  Wyndham made a very good
address and so did Terry, then Wyndham said he would try to get her to
speak.  She has lost the use of her hands and legs and can only walk
with crutches, so he put his arm around her and her son lifted her from
the other side and then brought her to her feet, both crying like
children.  You could hear the people sobbing, it was so still.  She
said, "Ladies and Gentleman," looking at the stalls and boxes, then she
turned her head to the people on the stage below her and said,
"Brothers and Sisters," then she stood looking for a long time at the
gallery gods who had been waiting there twenty hours.  You could hear a
long "Ah" from the gallery when she looked up there, and then a "hush"
from all over it and there was absolute silence.  Then she smiled and
raised her finger to her bonnet and said, "Thank'ee, sir," and sank
back in her chair.  It was the most dramatic thing I ever saw on a
stage.  The orchestra struck up "Auld Lang Syne" and they gave three
cheers on the stage and in the house.  The papers got out special
editions, and said it was the greatest theatrical event there had ever
been in London.

DICK.




CHAPTER XI

THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR

When the news reached Richard that the Spanish-American War seemed
inevitable he returned at once to New York.  Here he spent a few days
in arranging to act as correspondent for the New York Herald, the
London Times, and Scribner's Magazine, and then started for Key West.


Off Key West--April 24th, 1898.
  On Board Smith, Herald Yacht.

DEAR MOTHER:

I wrote you such a cross gloomy letter that I must drop you another to
make up for it.  Since I wrote that an hour ago we have received word
that war is declared and I am now on board the Smith.  She is a really
fine vessel as big as Benedict's yacht with plenty of deck room and big
bunks.  I have everything I want on board and The Herald men are two
old Press men so we are good friends.  If I had had another hour I
believe I could have got a berth on the flag ship for Roosevelt
telegraphed me the longest and strongest letter on the subject a man
could write instructing the Admiral to take me on as I was writing
history.  Chadwick seemed willing but then the signal to set sail came
and we had to stampede.  All the ships have their sailing pennants up.
It is as calm as a mirror thank goodness but as hot as hell.  We expect
to be off Havana tomorrow at sunset.  Then what we do no one knows.
The crew is on strike above and the mate is wrestling with them but as
it seems to be only a question of a few dollars it will come out all
right.  We expect to be back here on Sunday but may stay out later.
Don't worry if you don't hear.  It is grand to see the line of
battleships five miles out like dogs in a leash puffing and straining.
Thank God they'll let them slip any minute now.  I don't know where
"Stenie" is.  I am now going to take a nap while the smooth water lasts.

DICK.


--Flagship New York--

Off Havana,

April 26, 1898.

DEAR FAMILY:

I left Key West on the morning of the 24th in the Dolphin with the idea
of trying to get on board the flagship on the strength of Roosevelt's
letter.  Stenie Bonsal got on just before she sailed, not as a
correspondent, but as a magazine-writer for McClure's, who have given
him a commission, and because he could act as interpreter.  I left the
flagship the morning of the day I arrived.  The captain of the Dolphin
apologized to his officers while we were at anchor in the harbor of Key
West, because his was a "cabin" and not a "gun" ship, and because he
had to deliver the mails at once on board the flagship and not turn out
of his course for anything, no matter how tempting a prize it might
appear to be.  He then proceeded to chase every sail and column of
smoke on the horizon, so that the course was like a cat's cradle.  We
first headed for a big steamer and sounded "general quarters."  It was
fine to see the faces of the apprentices as they ran to get their
cutlasses and revolvers, their eyes open and their hair on end, with
the hope that they were to board a Spanish battleship.  But at the
first gun she ran up an American flag, and on getting nearer we saw she
was a Mallory steamer.  An hour later we chased another steamer, but
she was already a prize, with a prize crew on board.  Then we had a
chase for three hours at night; after what we believed was the Panama,
but she ran away from us.  We fired three shells after her, and she
still ran and got away.  The next morning I went on board the New York
with Zogbaum, the artist.  Admiral Sampson is a fine man; he impressed
me very much.  He was very much bothered at the order forbidding
correspondents on the ship, but I talked like a father to him, and he
finally gave in, and was very nice about the way he did it.  Since then
I have had the most interesting time and the most novel experience of
my life.  We have been lying from three to ten miles off shore.  We can
see Morro Castle and houses and palms plainly without a glass, and with
one we can distinguish men and women in the villages.  It is, or was,
frightfully hot, and you had to keep moving all the time to get out of
the sun.  I mess with the officers, but the other correspondents, the
Associated Press and Ralph Paine of The World and Press of
Philadelphia, with the middies.  Paine got on because Scovel of The
World has done so much secret service work for the admiral, running in
at night and taking soundings, and by day making photographs of the
coast, also carrying messages to the insurgents.

It is a wonderful ship, like a village, and as big as the Paris.  We
drift around in the sun or the moonlight, and when we see a light,
chase after it.  There is a band on board that plays twice a day.  It
is like a luxurious yacht, with none of the ennui of a yacht.  The
other night, when we were heading off a steamer and firing six-pounders
across her bows, the band was playing the "star" song from the
Meistersinger.  Wagner and War struck me as the most fin de siecle idea
of war that I had ever heard of.  The nights have been perfectly
beautiful, full of moonlight, when we sit on deck and smoke.  It is
like looking down from the roof of a high building.  Yesterday they
brought a Spanish officer on board, he had been picked up in a schooner
with his orderly.  I was in Captain Chadwick's cabin when he was
brought in, and Scovel interpreted for the captain, who was more
courteous than any Spanish Don that breathes.  The officer said he had
been on his way to see his wife and newly born baby at Matanzas, and
had no knowledge that war had been declared.  I must say it did me good
to see him.  I remembered the way the Spanish officers used to insult
me in a language which I, fortunately for me, could not understand, and
how I hated the sight of them, and I enjoyed seeing his red and yellow
cockade on the table before me, while I sat in a big armchair and
smoked and was in hearing of the marines drilling on the upper deck.
He was invited to go to breakfast with the officers, and I sat next to
him, and as it happened to be my turn to treat, I had the satisfaction
of pouring drinks down his throat.  I told stories about Spanish
officers all the time to the rest of the mess, pretending I was telling
them something else by making drawings on the tablecloth, so that the
unhappy officer on his other side, who was talking Spanish to him, had
a hard time not to laugh.  I told Zogbaum he ought to draw a picture of
him at the mess to show how we treated prisoners, and a companion one
of the captain of the Compeliton, who came over with us on the Dolphin,
and who showed us the marks of the ropes on his wrists and arms the
Spaniards had bound him with when he was in Cabanas for nine months.
The orderly messed with the bluejackets, who treated him in the most
hospitable manner.  He was a poor little peasant boy, half starved and
hollow-eyed, and so scared that he could hardly stand, but they took
great pride in the fact that they had made him eat three times of
everything.  They are, without prejudice, the finest body of men and
boys you would care to see, and as humorous and polite and keen as any
class of men I ever met.

The war could be ended in a month so far as the island of Cuba is
concerned, if the troops were ready and brought over here.  The coast
to Havana for ten miles is broad enough for them to march along it, and
the heights above could be covered the entire time by the fleet, so
that it would be absolutely impossible for any force to withstand the
awful hailstorm they would play on it.  Transports carrying the
provisions would be protected by the ships on the gulf side, and the
guns at Morro could be shut up in twenty-four hours.  This is not a
dream, but the most obvious and feasible plan, and it is a disgrace if
the Washington politicians delay.  As to health, this is the healthiest
part of the coast.  The trade winds blow every day of the year, and the
fever talk is all nonsense.  The army certainly has delayed most
scandalously in mobilizing.  This talk of waiting a month is suicide.
It is a terrible expense.  It keeps the people on a strain, destroys
business, and the health of the troops at Tampa is, to my mind, in much
greater danger than it would be on the hills around Havana, where, as
Scovel says, there is as much yellow fever as there is snow.  Tell Dad
to urge them to act promptly.  In the meanwhile I am having a
magnificent time.  I am burned and hungry and losing about a ton of fat
a day, and I sleep finely.  The other night the Porter held us up, but
it was a story that never got into the papers.  I haven't missed a
trick so far except not getting on the flagship from the first, but
that does not count now since I am on board.

I haven't written anything yet, but I am going to begin soon.  I expect
to make myself rich on this campaign.  I get ten cents a word from
Scribner's for everything I send them, if it is only a thousand words,
and I get four hundred dollars a week salary from The Times, and all my
expenses.  I haven't had any yet, but when I go back and join the army,
I am going to travel en suite with an assistant and the best and
gentlest ponies; a courier and a servant, a tent and a secretary and a
typewriter, so that Miles will look like a second lieutenant.

When I came out here on the Dolphin I said I was going to Tampa, lying
just on the principle that it is no other newspaper-man's business
where you are going.  So, The Herald man at Key West, hearing this, and
not knowing I WAS GOING TO THE FLAGSHIP, called Long, making a strong
kick about the correspondents, Bonsal, Remington and Paine, who are, or
were, with the squadron.  Stenie left two days ago, hoping to get a
commission on the staff of General Lee.  So yesterday Scovel told me
Long had cabled in answer to The Herald's protests to the admiral as
follows:  "Complaints have been received that correspondents Paine,
Remington and Bonsal are with the squadron.  Send them ashore at once.
There must be no favoritism."

Scovel got the admiral at once to cable Long on his behalf because of
his services as a spy, but as Roosevelt had done so much for me, I
would not appeal over him, and this morning I sent in word to the
admiral that I was leaving the ship and would like to pay my respects.
Sampson is a thin man with a gray beard.  He looks like a college
professor and has very fine, gentle eyes.  He asked me why I meant to
leave the ship, and I said I had heard one of the torpedo boats was
going to Key West, and I thought I would go with her if he would allow
it.  He asked if I had seen the cable from Long, and I said I had heard
of it, and that I was really going so as not to embarrass him with my
presence.  He said, "I have received three different orders from the
Secretary, one of them telling me I could have such correspondents on
board as were agreeable to me.  He now tells me that they must all go.
You can do as you wish.  You are perfectly welcome to remain until the
conflict of orders is cleared up."  I saw he was mad and that he wanted
me to stay, or at least not to go of my own wish, so that he could have
a grievance out of it--if he had to send me away after having been told
he could have those with him who were agreeable to him.  Captain
Chadwick was in the cabin, and said, "Perhaps Mr. Davis had better
remain another twenty-four hours."  The admiral added, "Ships are going
to Key West daily."  Then Chadwick repeated that he thought I had
better stay another day, and made a motion to me to do so.  So I said I
would, and now I am waiting to see what is going to happen.  Outside,
Chadwick told me that something in the way of an experience would
probably come off, so I have hopes.  By this time, of course, you know
all about it.  I shall finish this later.

We began bombarding Matanzas twenty minutes after I wrote the above.
It was great.  I guess I got a beat, as The Herald tug is the only one
in sight.

DICK.


Flagship--Off Havana

April 30th, 1898.

DEAR FAMILY:

You must not mind if I don't write often, but I feel that you see The
Herald every day and that tells you of what I am seeing and doing, and
I am writing so much, and what with keeping notes and all, I haven't
much time-- What you probably want to know is that I am well and that
my sciatica is not troubling me at all--Mother always wants to know
that.  On the other hand I am on the best ship from which to see things
and on the safest, as she can move quicker and is more heavily armored
than any save the battleships-- The fact that the admiral is on board
and that she is the flagship is also a guarantee that she will not be
allowed to expose herself.  I was very badly scared when I first came
to Key West for fear I should be left especially when I didn't make the
flagship-- But I have not missed a single trick so far-- Bonsal missed
the bombardment and so did Stephen Crane-- All the press boats were
away except The Herald's.  I had to write the story in fifteen minutes,
so it was no good except that we had it exclusively--

I am sending a short story of the first shot fired to the Scribner's
and am arranging with them to bring out a book on the Campaign.  I have
asked them to announce it as it will help me immensely here for it is
as an historian and not as a correspondent that I get on over those men
who are correspondents for papers only.  I have made I think my
position here very strong and the admiral is very much my friend as are
also his staff.  Crane on the other hand took the place of Paine who
was exceedingly popular with every one and it has made it hard for
Crane to get into things-- I am having a really royal time, it is so
beautiful by both night and day and there is always color and movement
and the most rigid discipline with the most hearty good feeling-- I get
on very well with the crew too, one of them got shot by a revolver's
going off and I asked the surgeon if I might not help at the operation
so that I might learn to be useful, and to get accustomed to the sight
of wounds and surgery-- It was a wonderful thing to see, and I was
confused as to whether I admired the human body more or the way the
surgeon's understood and mastered it-- The sailor would not give way to
the ether and I had to hold him for an hour while they took out his
whole insides and laid them on the table and felt around inside of him
as though he were a hollow watermelon.  Then they put his stomach back
and sewed it in and then sewed up his skin and he was just as good as
new.  We carried him over to a cot and he came to, and looked up at us.
We were all bare-armed and covered with his blood, and then over at the
operating table, which was also covered with his blood.  He was gray
under his tan and his lips were purple and his eyes were still drunk
with the ether-- But he looked at our sanguinary hands and shook his
head sideways on the pillow and smiled-- "You'se can't kill me," he
said, "I'm a New Yorker, by God--you'se can't kill me." The Herald
cabled for a story as to how the crew of the New York behaved in
action.  I think I shall send them that although there are a few things
the people had better take for granted-- Of course, we haven't been "in
action" yet but the first bombardment made me nervous until it got well
started.  I think every one was rather nervous and it was chiefly to
show them there was nothing to worry about that we fired off the U. S.
guns.  They talk like veterans now-- It was much less of a strain than
I had expected, there was no standing on your toes nor keeping your
mouth open or putting wadding in your ears.  I took photographs most of
the time, and they ought to be excellent--what happened was that you
were thrown up off the deck just as you are when an elevator starts
with a sharp jerk and there was an awful noise like the worst clap of
thunder you ever heard close to your ears, then the smoke covered
everything and you could hear the shot going through the air like a
giant rocket-- The shots they fired at us did not cut any ice except a
shrapnel that broke just over the main mast and which reminded me of
Greece-- The other shots fell short-- The best thing was to see the
Captains of the Puritan and Cincinnati frantically signalling to be
allowed to fire too-- A little fort had opened on us from the left so
they plugged at that, it was a wonderful sight, the Monitor was swept
with waves and the guns seemed to come out of the water.  The
Cincinnati did the best of all.  Her guns were as fast as the reports
of a revolver, a self-cocking revolver, when one holds the trigger for
the whole six.  We got some copies of The Lucha on the Panama and their
accounts of what was going on in Havana were the best reading I ever
saw-- They probably reported the Matanzas bombardment as a Spanish
victory-- The firing yesterday was very tame.  We all sat about on deck
and the band played all the time-- We didn't even send the men to
quarters-- I do not believe the army intends to move for two weeks yet,
so I shall stay here.  They seem to want me to do so, and I certainly
want to-- But that army is too slow for words, and we love the "Notes
from the Front" in The Tribune, telling about the troops at
Chickamauga-- I believe what will happen is that a chance shot will
kill some of our men, and the Admiral won't do a thing but knock hell
out of whatever fort does it and land a party of marines and
bluejackets-- Even if they only occupy the place for 24 hours, it will
beat that army out and that's what I want.  They'll get second money in
the Campaign if they get any, unless they brace up and come over-- I
have the very luck of the British Army, I walked into an open hatch
today and didn't stop until I caught by my arms and the back of my
neck.  It was very dark and they had opened it while I was in a cabin.
The Jackie whose business it was to watch it was worse scared than I
was, and I looked up at him while still hanging to the edges with my
neck and arms and said "why didn't you tell me?"  He shook his head and
said, "that's so, Sir, I certainly should have told you, I certainly
should"-- They're exactly like children and the reason is, I think,
because they are so shut off from the contamination of the world.  One
of these ships is like living in a monastery, and they are as
disciplined and gentle as monks, and as reckless as cowboys.  When I go
forward and speak to one of them they all gather round and sit on the
deck in circles and we talk and they listen and make the most
interesting comments-- The middy who fired the first gun at Matanzas is
a modest alert boy about 18 years old and crazy about his work-- So,
the Captain selected him for the honor and also because there is such
jealousy between the bow and stern guns that he decided not to risk
feelings being hurt by giving it to either-- So, Boone who was at
Annapolis a month ago was told to fire the shot-- We all took his name
and he has grown about three inches.  We told him all of the United
States and England would be ringing with his name-- When I was alone he
came and sat down on a gull beside me and told me he was very glad they
had let him fire that first gun because his mother was an invalid and
he had gone into the navy against her wish and he hoped now that she
would be satisfied when she saw his name in the papers.  He was too
sweet and boyish about it for words and I am going to take a snapshot
at him and put his picture in Scribner's--"he only stands about so
high--"

DICK.

I enclose a souvenir of the bombardment.  Please keep it carefully for
me-- It was the first shot "in anger" in thirty years.


TAMPA, May 3rd, 1898.

DEAR NORA:

We are still here and probably will be.  It is a merry war, if there
were only some girls here the place would be perfect.  I don't know
what's the matter with the American girl--here am I--and Stenie and
Willie Chanler and Frederick Remington and all the boy officers of the
army and not one solitary, ugly, plain, pretty, or beautiful girl.  I
bought a fine pony to-day, her name was Ellaline but I thought that was
too much glory for Ellaline so I diffused it over the whole company by
re-christening her Gaiety Girl, because she is so quiet, all the Gaiety
Girls I know are quiet.

She never does what I tell her anyway, so it doesn't matter what I call
her.  But when this cruel war is over ($6 a day with bath room
adjoining) I am going to have an oil painting of her labelled "Gaiety
Girl the Kentucky Mare that carried the news of the fall of Havana to
Matanzas, fifty miles under fire and Richard Harding Davis."  To-morrow
I am going to buy a saddle and a servant.  War is a cruel thing
especially to army officers.  They have to wear uniforms and are not
allowed to take off their trousers to keep cool-- They take off
everything else except their hats and sit in the dining room without
their coats or collars-- That's because it is war time.  They are
terrible brave--you can see it by the way they wear bouquets on their
tunics and cigarette badges and Cuban flags and by not saluting their
officers.  One General counted today and forty enlisted men passed him
without saluting.  The army will have to do a lot of fighting to make
itself solid with me.  They are mounted police.  We have a sentry here,
he sits in a rocking chair.  Imagine one of Sampson's or Dewey's
bluejackets sitting down even on a gun carriage.  Wait till I write my
book.  I wouldn't say a word now but when I write that book I'll give
them large space rates.  I am writing it now, the first batch comes out
in Scribner's in July.

to you all.

DICK.


During the early days of the war, Richard received the appointment of a
captaincy, but on the advice of his friends that his services were more
valuable as a correspondent, he refused the commission.  The following
letter shows that at least at the time my brother regretted the
decision, but as events turned out he succeeded in rendering splendid
service not only as a correspondent but in the field.


TAMPA--May 14, 1898.

DEAR CHAS.

On reflection I am greatly troubled that I declined the captaincy.  It
is unfortunate that I had not time to consider it.  We shall not have
another war and I can always be a war correspondent in other countries
but never again have a chance to serve in my own.  The people here
think it was the right thing to do but the outside people won't.  Not
that I care about that, but I think I was weak not to chance it.  I
don't know exactly what I ought to do.  When I see all these kid
militia men enlisted it makes me feel like the devil.  I've no doubt
many of them look upon it as a sort of a holiday and an outing and like
it for the excitement, but it would bore me to death.  The whole thing
would bore me if I thought I had to keep at it for a year or more.
That is the fault of my having had too much excitement and freedom.  It
spoils me to make sacrifices that other men can make.  Whichever way it
comes out I shall be sorry and feel I did not do the right thing.
Lying around this hotel is enough to demoralize anybody.  We are much
more out of it than you are, and one gets cynical and loses interest.
On the other hand I would be miserable to go back and have done
nothing.  It is a question of character entirely and I don't feel I've
played the part at all.  It's all very well to say you are doing more
by writing, but are you?  It's an easy game to look on and pat the
other chaps on the back with a few paragraphs, that is cheap
patriotism.  They're taking chances and you're not and when the war's
over they'll be happy and I won't.  The man that enlists or volunteers
even if he doesn't get further than Chickamauga or Gretna Green and the
man who doesn't enlist at all but minds his own business is much better
off than I will be writing about what other men do and not doing it
myself, especially as I had a chance of a life time, and declined it.
I'll always feel I lost in character by not sticking to it whether I
had to go to Arizona or Governor's Island.  I was unfortunate in having
Lee and Remington to advise me.  We talked for two hours in Fred's
bedroom and they were both dead against it and Lee composed my telegram
to the president.  Now, I feel sure I did wrong.  Shafter did not care
and the other officers were delighted and said it was very honorable
and manly giving me credit for motives I didn't have.  I just didn't
think it was good enough although I wanted it too and I missed
something I can never get again.  I am very sad about it.  I know all
the arguments for not taking it but as a matter of fact I should have
done so.  I would have made a good aide, and had I got a chance I
certainly would have won out and been promoted.  That there are fools
appointed with me is no answer.  I wouldn't have stayed in their class
long.

DICK.


TAMPA, May 29, 1898.

DEAR CHAS.:

The cigars came; they are O. K. and a great treat after Tampa products.
Captain Lee and I went out to the volunteer camps today:  Florida,
Alabama, Ohio and Michigan, General Lee's push, and it has depressed me
very much.  I have been so right about so many things these last five
years, and was laughed at for making much of them.  Now all I urged is
proved to be correct; nothing our men wear is right.  The shoes, the
hats, the coats, all are dangerous to health and comfort; one-third of
the men cannot wear the regulation shoe because it cuts the instep, and
buy their own, and the volunteers are like the Cuban army in
appearance.  The Greek army, at which I made such sport, is a fine
organization in comparison as far as outfit goes; of course, there is
no comparison in the spirit of the men.  One colonel of the Florida
regiment told us that one-third of his men had never fired a gun.  They
live on the ground; there are no rain trenches around the tents, or
gutters along the company streets; the latrines are dug to windward of
the camp, and all the refuse is burned to WINDWARD.

Half of the men have no uniforms nor shoes.  I pointed out some of the
unnecessary discomforts the men were undergoing through ignorance, and
one colonel, a Michigan politician, said, "Oh, well, they'll learn.  It
will be a good lesson for them."  Instead of telling them, or telling
their captains, he thinks it best that they should find things out by
suffering.  I cannot decide whether to write anything about it or not.
I cannot see where it could do any good, for it is the system that is
wrong--the whole volunteer system, I mean.  Captain Lee happened to be
in Washington when the first Manila outfit was starting from San
Francisco, and it was on his representations that they gave the men
hammocks, and took a store of Mexican dollars.  They did not know that
Mexican dollars are the only currency of the East, and were expecting
to pay the men in drafts on New York.

Isn't that a pitiable situation when a captain of an English company
happens to stray into the war office, and happens to have a good heart
and busies himself to see that our own men are supplied with hammocks
and spending money.  None of our officers had ever seen khaki until
they saw Lee's, nor a cork helmet until they saw mine and his; now,
naturally, they won't have anything else, and there is not another one
in the country.  The helmets our troops wear would be smashed in one
tropical storm, and they are so light that the sun beats through them.
They are also a glaring white, and are cheap and nasty and made of
pasteboard.  The felt hats are just as bad; the brim is not broad
enough to protect them from the sun or to keep the rain off their
necks, and they are made of such cheap cotton stuff that they grow hard
when they are wet and heavy, instead of shedding the rain as good felt
would do.  They have always urged that our uniforms, though not smart
nor "for show," were for use.  The truth is, as they all admit, that
for the tropics they are worse than useless, and that in any climate
they are cheap and poor.

I could go on for pages, but it has to be written later; now they would
only think it was an attack on the army.  But it is sickening to see
men being sacrificed as these men will be.  This is the worst season of
all in the Philippines.  The season of typhoons and rainstorms and
hurricanes, and they would have sent the men off without anything to
sleep on but the wet ground and a wet blanket.  It has been a great
lesson for me, and I have rubber tents, rubber blankets, rubber coats
and hammocks enough for an army corps.  I have written nothing for the
paper, because, if I started to tell the truth at all, it would do no
good, and it would open up a hell of an outcry from all the families of
the boys who have volunteered.  Of course, the only answer is a
standing army of a hundred thousand, and no more calling on the
patriotism of men unfitted and untrained.  It is the sacrifice of the
innocents.  The incompetence and, unreadiness of the French in 1870 was
no worse than our own is now.  It is a terrible and pathetic spectacle,
and the readiness of the volunteers to be sacrificed is all the more
pathetic.  It seems almost providential that we had this false-alarm
call with Spain to show the people how utterly helpless they are.

love,

DICK.


TAMPA, June 9th, 1898.

Well, here we are again.  Talk of the "Retreat from Ottawa" I've
retreated more in this war than the Greeks did.  If they don't brace up
soon, I'll go North and refuse to "recognize" the war.  I feel I
deserve a pension and a medal as it is.  We had everything on board and
our cabins assigned us and our "war kits" in which we set forth taken
off, and were in yachting flannels ready for the five days cruise.  I
had the devil of a time getting out to the flagship, as they call the
headquarters boat.  I went out early in the morning of the night when I
last wrote you.  I stayed up all that night watching troops arrive and
lending a helping hand and a word of cheer to dispirited mules and men,
also segars and cool drinks, none of them had had food for twenty-four
hours and the yellow Florida people having robbed them all day had shut
up and wouldn't open their miserable shops.  They even put sentries
over the drinking water of the express company which is only making
about a million a day out of the soldiers.  So their soldiers slept
along the platform and trucks rolled by them all night, shaking the
boards on which they lay by an inch or two.  About four we heard that
Shafter was coming and an officer arrived to have his luggage placed on
the Seguranca.  I left them all on the pier carrying their own baggage
and sweating and dripping and no one having slept.  Their special train
had been three hours in coming nine miles.  I hired a small boat and
went off to the flagship alone but the small boat began to leak and I
bailed and the colored boy pulled and the men on the transports cheered
us on.  Just at the sinking point I hailed a catboat and we transferred
the Admiral's flag to her and also my luggage.  The rest of the day we
spent on the transport.  We left it this morning.  Some are still on it
but as they are unloading all the horses and mules from the other
transports fifteen having died from the heat below deck and as they
cannot put them on again under a day, I am up here to get cool and to
stretch my legs.  The transport is all right if it were not so awfully
crowded.  I am glad I held out to go with the Headquarter staff.  I
would have died on the regular press boat, as it is the men are
interesting on our boat.  We have all the military attaches and Lee,
Remington, Whitney and Bonsal.  The reason we did not go was because
last night the Eagle and Resolute saw two Spanish cruisers and two
torpedo boats laying for us outside, only five miles away.  What they
need with fourteen ships of war to guard a bottled up fleet and by
leaving twenty-six transports some of them with 1,400 men on them
without any protection but a small cruiser and one gun boat is beyond
me.  The whole thing is beyond me.  It is the most awful picnic that
ever happened, you wouldn't credit the mistakes that are made.  It is
worse than the French at Sedan a million times.  We are just amateurs
at war and about like the Indians Columbus discovered.  I am
exceedingly pleased with myself at taking it so good naturedly.  I
would have thought I would have gone mad or gone home long ago.  Bonsal
and Remington threaten to go every minute.  Miles tells me we shall
have to wait until those cruisers are located or bottled up.  I'm tired
of bottling up fleets.  I like the way Dewey bottles them.  What a
story that would have made.  Twenty-six transports with as many
thousand men sunk five miles out and two-thirds of them drowned.
Remember the Maine indeed! they'd better remember the Main and brace
up.  If we wait until they catch those boats I may be here for another
month as we cannot dare go away for long or far.  If we decide to go
with a convoy which is what we ought to do, we may start in a day or
two.  Nothing you read in the papers is correct.  Did I tell you that
Miles sent Dorst after me the other night and made me a long speech,
saying he thought I had done so well in refusing the commission.  I was
glad he felt that way about it.  Well, lots of love.  I'm now going to
take a bath.  God bless you, this is a "merry war."

RICHARD.


In sight of Santiago--

June 26th, 1898.

DEAR CHAS.:

We have come to a halt here in a camp along the trail to Santiago.  You
can see it by climbing a hill.  Instead of which I am now sitting by a
fine stream on a cool rock.  I have discovered that you really enjoy
things more when you are not getting many comforts than you do when you
have all you want.  That sounds dull but it is most consoling.  I had a
bath this morning in these rocks that I would not have given up for all
the good dinners I ever had at the Waldorf, or the Savoy.  It just went
up and down my spine and sent thrills all over me.  It is most
interesting now and all the troubles of the dull days of waiting at
Tampa and that awful time on the troopship are over.  The army is
stretched out along the trail from the coast for six miles.  Santiago
lies about five miles ahead of us.  I am very happy and content and the
book for Scribners ought to be an interesting one.  It is really very
hard that my despatches are limited to 100 words for there are lots of
chances.  The fault lies with the army people at Washington, who give
credentials to any one who asks.  To The Independent and other
periodicals--in no sense newspapers, and they give seven to one paper,
consequently we as a class are a pest to the officers and to each
other.  Fortunately, the survival of the fittest is the test and only
the best men in every sense get to the front.  There are fifty others
at the base who keep the wire loaded with rumors, so when after great
difficulty we get the correct news back to Daiquire a Siboney there is
no room for it.  Some of the "war correspondents" have absolutely
nothing but the clothes they stand in, and the others had to take up
subscriptions for them.  They gambled all the time on the transports
and are ensconced now at the base with cards and counters and nothing
else.  Whitney has turned out great at the work and I am glad he is not
on a daily paper or he would share everything with me.  John Fox,
Whitney and I are living on Wood's rough riders.  We are very welcome
and Roosevelt has us at Headquarters but, of course, we see the men we
know all the time.  You get more news with the other regiments but the
officers, even the Generals, are such narrow minded slipshod men that
we only visit them to pick up information.  Whitney and I were the only
correspondents that saw the fight at Guasimas.  He was with the
regulars but I had the luck to be with Roosevelt.  He is sore but still
he saw more than any one else and is proportionally happy.  Still he
naturally would have liked to have been with our push.  We were within
thirty yards of the Spaniards and his crowd were not nearer than a
quarter of a mile which was near enough as they had nearly as many
killed.  Gen. Chaffee told me to-day that it was Wood's charge that won
the day, without it the tenth could not have driven the Spaniards
back-- Wood is a great young man, he has only one idea or rather all
his ideas run in one direction, his regiment, he eats and talks nothing
else.  He never sleeps more than four hours and all the rest of the
time he is moving about among the tents-- Between you and me and the
policeman, it was a very hot time-- Maybe if I drew you a map you would
understand why.

Wood and Gen. Young, by agreement the night before and without orders
from anybody decided to advance at daybreak and dislodge the Spaniards
from Las Guasimas.  They went by two narrow trails single file, the two
trails were along the crests of a line of hills with a valley between.
The dotted line is the trail we should have taken had the Cubans told
us it existed, if we had done so we would have had the Spaniards in the
frontband rear as General Young would have caught them where they
expected him to come, and we would have caught them where they were not
looking for us.  Of course, the Cubans who are worthless in every way
never told us of this trail until we had had the meeting.  No one knew
we were near Spaniards until both columns were on the place where the
two trails meet.  Then our scouts came back and reported them and the
companies were scattered out as you see them in the little dots.  The
Spaniards were absolutely hidden not over 25 per cent of the men saw
one of them for two hours-- I ran out with the company on the right of
the dotted line, marked "our position."  I thought it was a false alarm
and none of us believed there were any Spaniards this side of Santiago.
The ground was covered with high grass and cactus and vines so that you
could not see twenty feet ahead, the men had to beat the vines with
their carbines to get through them.  We had not run fifty yards through
the jungle before they opened on us with a quick firing gun at a
hundred yards.  I saw the enemy on the hill across the valley and got
six sharp shooters and began on them, then the fire got so hot that we
had to lie on our faces and crawl back to the rear.  I had a wounded
man to carry and was in a very bad way because I had sciatica, Two of
his men took him off while I stopped to help a worse wounded trooper,
but I found he was dead.  When I had come back for him in an hour, the
vultures had eaten out his eyes and lips.  In the meanwhile a trooper
stood up on the crest with a guidon and waved it at the opposite trail
to find out if the firing there was from Spaniards or Len Young's
negroes.  He was hit in three places but established the fact that
Young was up on the trail on our right across the valley for they
cheered.  He was a man who had run on the Gold Ticket for Congress in
Arizona, and consequently, as some one said, naturally should have led
a forlorn hope.  A blackguard had just run past telling them that Wood
was killed and that he had been ordered to Siboney for reinforcements.
That was how the report spread that we were cut to pieces-- A reporter
who ran away from Young's column was responsible for the story that I
was killed.  He meant Marshall who was on the left of the line and who
was shot through the spine-- There was a lot of wounded at the base and
the fighting in front was fearful to hear.  It was as fast as a hard
football match and you must remember it lasted two full hours; during
that time the men were on their feet all the time or crawling on their
hands-- Not one of them, with the exception of ----, and a Sergeant who
threw away his gun and ran, went a step back.  It was like playing
blindman's buff and you were it.  I got separated once and was scared
until I saw the line again, as my leg was very bad and I could not get
about over the rough ground.  I went down the trail and I found Capron
dying and the whole place littered with discarded blankets and
haversacks.  I also found Fish and pulled him under cover--he was quite
dead-- Then I borrowed a carbine and joined Capron's troop, a second
lieutenant and his Sergeant were in command.  The man next me in line
got a bullet through his sleeve and one through his shirt and you could
see where it went in and came out without touching the skin.  The
firing was very high and we were in no danger so I told the lieutenant
to let us charge across an open place and take a tin shack which was
held by the Spaniards' rear guard, for they were open in retreat.
Roosevelt ordered his men to do the same thing and we ran forward
cheering across the open and then dropped in the grass and fired.  I
guess I fired about twenty rounds and then formed into a strategy board
and went off down the trail to scout.  I got lonely and was coming back
when I met another trooper who sat down and said he was too hot to run
in any direction Spaniard or no Spaniard.  So we sat down and panted.
At last he asked me if I was R. H. D. and I said I was and he said "I'm
Dean, I met you in Harvard in the racquet court." Then we embraced--the
tenth came up then and it was all over.  My leg, thank goodness, is all
right again and has been so for three days.  It was only the running
about that caused it.  I won't have to run again as I have a horse now
and there will be no more ambushes and moreover we have 12,000 men
around us-- Being together that way in a tight place has made us all
friends and I guess I'll stick to the regiment.  Send this to dear
Mother and tell her I was not born to be killed.  I ought to tell you
more of the charming side of the life--we are all dirty and hungry and
sleep on the ground and have grand talks on every subject around the
headquarters tent.  I was never more happy and content and never so
well.  It is hot but at night it is quite cool and there has been no
rain only a few showers. 'No one is ill and there have been no cases of
fever.  I have not heard from you or any one since the 14th, which is
not really long but so much goes on that it seems so.  Lots of love to
you all.

DICK.


After reading this over I ought perhaps to say that the position of the
real correspondents is absolutely the very best.  No one confounds us
with the men at the base, and nothing they have they deny us.  We are
treated immeasurably better than the poor attaches who are still on the
ship and who if they were spies could not be treated worse.  But for
Whitney, Remington and myself nothing is too good.  Generals fight to
have us on their staffs and all that sort of thing, so I really cannot
complain, except about the fact that our real news is crowded out by
the faker in the rear.


SANTIAGO.

Headquarters
  Cavalry Division, U. S. Army.
    Headqrs.  Wood's Rough Riders.

June 29th, 1898.

DEAR DAD:

I suppose you are back from Marion now and I have missed you.  I can't
tell you how sorry I am.  I wanted to see you coming up the street this
summer in your knickerbockers and with no fish, but still happy.  Never
mind, we shall do the theatres this Fall, and have good walks downtown.
I hope Mother will come up and visit me this September, at Marion and
sit on Allen's and on the Clarks' porch and we can have Chas. too.  I
suppose he will have had his holiday but he can come up for a Sunday.
We expect to move up on Santiago the day after to-morrow, and it's
about time, for the trail will not be passable much longer.  It rains
every day at three o'clock for an hour and such rain you never guessed.
It is three inches high for an hour.  Then we all go out naked and dig
trenches to get it out of the way.  It is very rough living.  I have to
confess that I never knew how well off I was until I got to smoking
Durham tobacco and I've only half a bag of that left.  The enlisted men
are smoking dried horse droppings, grass, roots and tea.  Some of them
can't sleep they are so nervous for the want of it, but to-day a lot
came up and all will be well for them.  I've had a steady ration of
coffee, bacon and hard tack for a week and one mango, to night we had
beans.  Of course, what they ought to serve is rice and beans as fried
bacon is impossible in this heat.  Still, every one is well.  This is
the best crowd to be with--they are so well educated and so
interesting.  The regular army men are very dull and narrow and would
bore one to death.  We have Wood, Roosevelt, Lee, the British Attache,
Whitney and a Doctor Church, a friend of mine from Princeton, who is
quite the most cheerful soul and the funniest I ever met.  He carried
four men from the firing line the other day back half a mile to the
hospital tent.  He spends most of his time coming around headquarters
in an undershirt of mine and a gold bracelet fighting tarantulas.  I
woke up the other morning with one seven inches long and as hairy as
your head reposing on my pillow.  My sciatica bothers me but has not
prevented me seeing everything and I can dig rain gutters and cut wood
with any of them.  It is very funny to see Larned, the tennis champion,
whose every movement at Newport was applauded by hundreds of young
women, marching up and down in the wet grass.  Whitney and I guy him.
To-day a sentry on post was reading "As You Like It" and whenever I go
down the line half the men want to know who won the boat race-- To-day
Wood sent me out with a detail on a pretense of scouting but really to
give them a chance to see the country.  They were all college boys,
with Willie Tiffany as sergeant and we had a fine time and could see
the Spanish sentries quite plainly without a glass.  I hope you will
not worry over this long separation.  I don't know of any experience I
have had which has done me so much good, and being with such a fine lot
of fellows is a great pleasure.  The scenery is very beautiful when it
is not raining.  I have a cot raised off the ground in the Colonel's
tent and am very well off.  If Chaffee or Lawton, who are the finest
type of officers I ever saw, were in command, we would have been
fighting every day and would probably have been in by this time.  This
weather shows that Havana must be put off after Porto Rico.  They
cannot campaign in this mud.

DICK.


SANTIAGO, July 1898.

DEAR FAMILY:

This is just to reassure you that I am all right.  I and Marshall were
the only correspondents with Roosevelt.  We were caught in a clear case
of ambush.  Every precaution had been taken, but the natives knew the
ground and our men did not.  It was the hottest, nastiest fight I ever
imagined.  We never saw the enemy except glimpses.  Our men fell all
over the place, shouting to the others not to mind them, but to go on.
I got excited and took a carbine and charged the sugar house, which was
what is called the key to the position.  If the men had been regulars I
would have sat in the rear as B---- did, but I knew every other one of
them, had played football, and all that sort of thing, with them, so I
thought as an American I ought to help.  The officers were falling all
over the shop, and after it was all over Roosevelt made me a long
speech before some of the men, and offered me a captaincy in the
regiment any time I wanted it.  He told the Associated Press man that
there was no officer in his regiment who had "been of more help or
shown more courage" than your humble servant, so that's all right.
After this I keep quiet.  I promise I keep quiet.  Love to you all.

RICHARD.


From Cuba Richard sailed with our forces to Porto Rico, where his
experiences in the Spanish-American war came to an end, and he returned
to Marion.  He spent the fall in New York, and early in 1899 went to
London.

One of the most interesting, certainly the most widely talked of,
"sporting events" for which Richard was responsible was the sending of
an English district-messenger boy from London to Chicago.  The idea was
inspired by my brother's general admiration of the London messenger
service and his particular belief in one William Thomas Jaggers, a
fourteen-year-old lad whom Richard had frequently employed to carry
notes and run errands.  One day, during a casual luncheon conversation
at the Savoy with his friend Somers Somerset, Richard said that he
believed that if Jaggers were asked to carry a message to New York that
he could not only do it but would express no surprise at the
commission.  This conversation resulted in the bet described in the
following letters.  The boy slipped quietly away from London, but a few
days later the bet became public and the newspapers were filled with
speculation as to whether Jaggers could beat the mails.  The messenger
carried three letters, one to my sister, one to Miss Cecil Clark of
Chicago, whom Richard married a few months later, and one to myself.
As a matter of fact, Jaggers delivered his notes several hours before
letters travelling by the same boat reached the same destinations.  The
newspapers not only printed long accounts of Jaggers's triumphal
progress from New York to Chicago and back again, but used the success
of his undertaking as a text for many editorials against the dilatory
methods of our foreign-mail service.  Jaggers left London on March 11,
1899, and was back again on the 29th, having travelled nearly
eighty-four hundred miles in eighteen days.  On his return he was
received literally by a crowd of thousands, and his feat was given
official recognition by a gold medal pinned on his youthful chest by
the Duchess of Rutland.  Also, later on, at a garden fete he was
presented to the Queen, and incidentally, still later, returned to the
United States as "buttons" to my brother's household.


Bachelors' Club,
  Piccadilly, W.

March 15th, 1899.

DEAR CHAS.

I hope you are not annoyed about Jaggers.  When he started no one knew
of it but three people and I had no idea anyone else would, but the
company sent it to The Mail without my name but describing me as "an
American gentleman"-- Instantly the foreign correspondents went to them
to find out who I was and to whom I was sending the letter-- I told the
company it was none of their damned business--that I employed the boy
by the week and that I could send him where-ever I chose.  Then the
boy's father got proud and wrote to The Mail about his age and so they
got the boy's name.  Mine, however, is still out of it, but in America
they are sure to know as the people on the steamer are crazy about him
and Kinsey the Purser knows he is sent by me.  After he gets back from
Chicago and Philadelphia, you can do with him as you like until the
steamer sails.  If the thing is taken up as it is here and the fat is
in the fire, then you can do as you please-- I mean you can tell the
papers about it or not-- Somerset holds one end of the bets and I the
other.  There are two bets: one that he will beat the mail to Chicago,
Somerset agreeing to consider the letter you give him to Bruce, as
equivalent to one coming from here.  The other bet is that he will
deliver and get receipts from you, Nora and Bruce, and return here by
the 5th of April-- You and Bobby ought to be able to do well by him if
it becomes, as I say, so far public that there is no possibility of
further concealment-- You have my permission to do what you please-- He
is coming into my employ as soon as he gets back and as soon as the
company give him a medal.

Over here there is the greatest possible interest in the matter-- At
the Clubs I go to, the waiters all wait on me in order to have the
latest developments and when it was cabled over here that the Customs'
people intended stopping him, indignation raged at the Foreign office.

of love,

DICK.


89 Jermyn Street, S. W.

March--1899

DEAR NORA:

This is to be handed to you by my special messenger, who is to assure
you that I am in the best of health and spirits-- Keep him for a few
hours and then send him on to Chicago-- As he is doing this on a bet,
do not give him any written instructions only verbal ones.  I am very
well and happy and send you all my love-- Jaggers has been running
errands for me ever since I came here, and a most loyal servitor when I
was ill-- On his return I want to keep him on as a buttons.  See that
he gets plenty to eat-- If he comes back alive he will have broken the
messenger boy service record by three thousand miles.  Personally, it
does not cost me anything to speak of.  The dramatization of the
Soldiers continues briskly, and Maude is sending Grundy back the
Jackal, to have a second go at it.  Maude insists on its being done--so
I stand to win a lot.

RICHARD.


Beefsteak Club, 9, Green Street,
  Leicester Square, W. C. Tuesday.

March--1899.

DEAR MOTHER:--

The faithful Jaggers should have arrived to-day, or will do so this
evening-- I am sure you will make the poor little chap comfortable-- I
do regret having sent him on such a journey especially since the papers
here made such an infernal row over it-- However, neither of us will
lose by it in the end--

I dined with Lady Clarke last night and met Lord Castleton there and he
invited me up to Dublin for the Punchtown Races-- I have a great mind
to go and write a story on them-- Castleton is a great sport and very
popular at home and in England and it would be a pleasant experience.
Kuhne Beveridge is doing a bust of me in khaki outfit for the Academy
and also for a private exhibition of her own works, which includes the
Prince of Wales, and the Little Queen of Holland.

Hays Hammond has invited me down to South Africa again, with a promise
of making my fortune, but I am not going as it takes too long.

DICK.




CHAPTER XII

THE BOER WAR

On May 4, 1899, at Marion, Massachusetts, Richard was married to Cecil
Clark, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John M. Clark of Chicago.  After
the marriage Richard and his wife spent a few weeks in Marion and the
remainder of the summer in London and Aix-les-Bains.


MARION, May 28th, 1899.

DEAR MOTHER:

You sent me such a good letter about the visit of the three selected
chorus girls.  But what was best, was about your wishing to see me.  Of
course, you know that I feel that too.  I would have it so that we all
lived here, so that Dad could fish, and Nora and Cecil could discuss
life, and you and I could just take walks and chat.  But because that
cannot be, we are no further away than we ever were and when the pain
to see you comes, I don't let it hurt and I don't kill it either for it
is the sweetest pain I can feel.  If sons will go off and marry, or be
war-correspondents, or managers, it does not mean that Home is any the
less Home.  You can't wipe out history by changing the name of a
boulevard, as somebody said of the French, and if I were able to be in
two places at once, I know in which two places I would be here with
Cecil at Marion, and at Home in the Library with you and Dad and The
Evening Telegraph, and Nora and Van Bibber.  You will never know how
much I love you all and you must never give up trying to comprehend it.
God bless you and keep you, and my love to you every minute and always.

DICK.


Late in January, 1900, Richard and his wife started on their first
great adventure together to the Boer War.  Arriving at Cape Town,
Richard left his wife there and, acting as correspondent with the
British forces for the New York Herald and London Mail, saw the relief
of Ladysmith.  After this he returned to Cape Town, with the intention
of joining Lord Roberts in his advance on Pretoria.  But on arriving at
Cape Town he learned that Lord Roberts did not intend to move for three
weeks, and so decided to say farewell to the British army and to return
to London in a leisurely and sightseeing fashion along the east coast.
It was after they were well started on this return voyage that Richard
conceived the idea of leaving the ship at Durban, going to Pretoria,
and, as he expressed it, "watch the Boers fighting the same men I had
just seen fighting them."


R. M. S. Scot

February 4th, 1900.

DEAR MOTHER:

A great change has come since I wrote you from Madeira.  We are now on
Summer seas and have regulated the days so that they pass very
pleasantly--not that we do not want to be on land-- I never so much
wanted it-- Somers is with us and is such a comfort.  He is even
younger than he used to be and so quick and courteous and good
tempered.  He is like a boy off on a holiday-- I think he is very much
in love with his wife, but in spite of himself he is glad to get a
holiday, and like all of us he will be so much more glad when he is
homeward bound.  They threatened to shut us out of our only chance of
putting foot on land at Madeira-- In the first place, we were so
delayed by the storm that we arrived at eight o'clock at night, so that
we missed seeing it in its beauty of flowers and palms.  And then it
was so rough that they said it was most unsafe for us to attempt to go
ashore.  It was a great disappointment but I urged that every one loved
his own life, and if the natives were willing to risk theirs to sell us
photographs and wicker baskets it was probably safer than it looked--
So we agreed to die together, and with Somers got our rain coats, and
the three of us leaped into a row boat pulled by two Portugese pirates
and started off toward a row of lamps on a quay that seemed much lower
than the waves.  The remainder on the ship watched us disappear with
ominus warnings-- We really had a most adventurous passage--towards
shore the waves tossed us about like a lobster pot and we just missed
being run down by a coal barge and escaped an upset over the bow anchor
chain of a ship.  It was so close that both Somers and I had our coats
off and I told Cecil to grab the chain-- But we weathered it and landed
at a high gangway cut in the solid rock the first three steps of which
were swamped by the waves.  A rope and chain hung from the top of the
wharf and a man swung his weight on this and yanked us out to the steps
as the boat was on the wave.  The rain beat and the wind roared and
beautiful palms lashed the air with their fronds-- It was grand to get
on shore once again-- At the end of the wharf we were hustled into a
sled on steel runners, like a hearse with curtains around it and drawn
by bullocks-- The  streets were all of mosaic, thousands of little
stones being packed together like corn on a cob.  Over this the heavy
sledge was drawn by the bullocks while a small boy ran ahead through
the narrow streets to clear the way-- He had a feather duster made of
horse's tail as a badge of authority and he yelled some strange cry at
the empty streets and closed houses.  Another little boy in a striped
jersey ran beside and assured us he was a guide.  It was like a page
out of a fairy story.  The strange cart sliding and slipping over the
stones which were as smooth as ice, and the colored house fronts and
the palms and strange plants.  The darkness made it all the more
unreal-- There was a governor's palace buttressed and guarded by
sentinels in a strange uniform and queer little cafe's under vines--and
terraces of cannon, and at last a funny, pathetic little casino.  It
was such a queer imitation of Aix and Monte Carlo-- There were
chasseurs and footmen in magnificent livery and stucco white walls
ornamented with silk SHAWLS.  Also a very good band and a new roulette
table-- Coming in out of the night and the rain it was like a theatre
after the "dark scene" has just passed-- There were some most dignified
croupiers and three English women and a few sad English men and some
very wicked looking natives in diamonds and white waistcoats.  We had
only fifteen minutes to spare so we began playing briskly with two
shilling pieces Cecil with indifferent fortune and Somers losing-- But
I won every time and the croupiers gave me strange notes of the Bonco
de Portugal which I put back on the board only to get more of a larger
number-- I felt greatly embarrassed as I was not a real member of the
club and I hated to blow in out of a hurricane and take their money and
sail away again-- So I appealed to one of the sad eyed Englishmen and
he assured me it was all right, that they welcomed the people from the
passing steamers who generally left a few pounds each with the bank.
But the more I spread the money the more I won until finally the whole
room gathered around.  Then I sent out and ordered champagne for
everybody and spare gold to all the waiters and still cashed in
seventy-five dollars in English money.  It was pretty good for fifteen
minutes and we went out leaving the people open-eyed, and hitting the
champagne bottles-- It was all a part of the fun especially as with all
our gold we could get nothing for supper but "huevos frite" which was
all the Spanish I could remember and which meant fried eggs-- But we
were very wet and hungry and we got the eggs and some fruit and real
Madeira wine and then rowed out again rejoicing.  The pirates demanded
their pay half way to the boat while we were on the high seas but they
had struck the very wrong men, and I never saw a mutiny quelled so
abruptly-- Somers and I told them we'd throw them overboard and row
ourselves and they understood remarkably well-- The next day we were
the admired and envied of those who had not had the nerve "to dare to
attempt."  It was one of the best experiences altogether we ever had
and I shall certainly put Madeira on my silver cup.

RICHARD.


After their arrival at Cape Town, where Richard arranged for his wife
to stay during his absence at the British front, he started for
Ladysmith, sailing on the same vessel on which he had left England.


February 18th, 1900

board Scot.

DEAR MOTHER:

I got off yesterday and am hoping to get to Buller before Ladysmith is
relieved.  I could not get to go with Roberts because Ralph has been
here four months and has borne the heat and burden of the day, so
although I only came in order to be with Roberts and Kitchener I could
not ask to have Ralph recalled-- They wanted me with Roberts and I
wanted it but none of us could make up our minds to turn down Ralph.
So I am going up on this side track on the chance of seeing Ladysmith
relieved and of joining Roberts with Buller later.  I shall be
satisfied if I see Ladysmith fall.  Fortunately I am to do a great deal
of cabling for The Mail every day and that counts much more with the
reading public than letters--

Cape Town is a dusty, wind ridden western town with a mountain back of
it which one man said was a badly painted back drop-- The only
attractive thing about the town is this mountain and a hotel situated
at its base in perfectly beautiful gardens.  Here Cecil is settled.  I
got her a sitting room and a big bedroom and The Mail agent or Pryor
pays her $150 a week and will take good care of her.  It really is a
beautiful and comfortable hotel and grounds and she has made many
friends, and also I forced a pitch battle with a woman who was rude to
her when we visited the hospital-- So, as the hospital people were very
keen to have me see and praise their hospital they have taken up arms
against the unfortunate little bounder and championed Cecil and me.
Cecil had really nothing to do with it as you can imagine-- She only
laughed but I gave the lady lots to remember.

On the other hand every one is as kind and interested in Cecil as can
be.  Mrs. Waldron whose son is Secretary to Milner and his secretary
were more than polite to each of us.  Milner spent the whole evening we
were there talking to Cecil and not to the lady we had had the row
with, which was a pleasing triumph.  He sent me unsolicited a most
flattering personal letter to the Governor of Natal, saying that I had
come to him with my strong letters but that he had so enjoyed meeting
me that he wished to pass me on on his own account.  Cecil asked me
what it was I had talked so much to him about and I asked her if it
were possible she couldn't guess that of course I would be telling him
how to run the colony.  My advice was to bombard Cape Town and make
martial law, for the Cape Towners are the most rotten, cowardly lot of
rebels I ever imagined as being possible.  He seemed so glad to find
any one who appreciated that it was a queen's colony in name only and
said, "Mr. Davis, it is as bad as this--I can take a stroll with you
from these gardens (we were at the back of the Government House) and at
the end of our stroll we will be in hostile territory."

We spent the last day after I had got my orders to join Buller (who
seemed very pleased to have me) calling on the officials for passes
together and they were in a great state falling into their coats and
dressing guard for her and were all so friendly and hearty.  The Censor
seems to think I am a sort of Matthew Arnold and should be wrapped in
cotton, so does Pryor The Mail agent who apologizes for asking me to
cable, which is just what I want to do.  They are very generous and are
spending money like fresh air.  I am to cable letters to Cape Town,
only to save three days.  So, now all that is needed is for something
to happen.  Everything else is arranged.  All I want is to see three or
four good fights and a big story like the relief of Ladysmith and I am
ready and anxious to get home.  I shall observe them from behind an ant
hill--I don't say this to please you but because I mean it.  This is
not my war and all I want is to earn the very generous sums I have been
offered and get home.  We are just off Port Elizabeth.  I will go on
shore and post this there.  With all love.  DICK.


Deal's Central Hotel, East London.

February 20th, 1900.

DEAR MOTHER:

We are stopping at every port now, as though the Scot were a ferry
boat.  We came over the side to get here in baskets with a neat door in
the side and were bumped to the deck of the tender in all untenderness.
This is more like Africa than any place I have seen.  The cactus and
palms abound and the Kaffirs wear brass anklets and bracelets.  A man
at lunch at this hotel asked me if I was R. H. D. and said he was an
American who had got a commission in Brabants horse-- He gave me the
grandest sort of a segar and apparently on his representation the hotel
brought me two books to sign, marked "Autographs of Celebrities of the
Boer War."  It seemed in my case at least to be premature and hopeful.

Good luck and God bless you.  This will be the last letter you will get
for ten days or two weeks, as I am now going directly away from
steamers.  This one reaches you by a spy gentleman who is to give it to
Rene Bull of The Graphic and who will post it in Cape Town-- He and all
the other correspondents are abandoning Buller for Roberts.  Let 'em
all go.  The fewer the better, I say.  My luck will keep I hope.  DICK.


Imperial Hotel,
  Maritzburg, Natal.

Feb. 23rd, 1900.

DEAR MOTHER:--

I reached Durban yesterday.  They paraded the band in my honour and
played Yankee Doodle indefinitely-- I had corrupted them by giving them
drinks to play the "Belle of New York" nightly.  The English officers
thought Yankee Doodle was our national anthem and stood with their hats
off in a hurricane balancing on the deck of the tender on one foot--
The city of Durban is the best I have seen.  It was as picturesque as
the Midway at the Fair-- There were Persians, Malay, Hindoo, Babu's
Kaffirs, Zulu's and soldiers and sailors.  I went on board the Maine to
see the American doctors--one of them said he had met me on Walnut
Street, when he had nearly run me down with his ambulance from the
Penna Hospital.  Lady Randolph took me over the ship and was very much
puzzled when all the hospital stewards called me by name and made
complimentary remarks.  It impressed her so much apparently that she
and the American nurses I hadn't met on board came to see me off at the
station, which was very friendly.  I have had a horrible day here and
got up against the British officer in uniform and on duty bent-- The
chief trouble was that none of them knew what authority he had to do
anything--and I had to sit down and tell them.  I wonder with
intelligence like theirs that their Intelligence Department did not
tell them the Boers fought with war clubs and spears.  I bought a
ripping pony and my plan is to cut away from all my magnificent
equipment and try to overtake Buller before he reaches Ladysmith and
send back for the heavy things later.  It is just a question of minutes
really and it seems hard to have come 1500 miles and then to miss it by
an hour-- I arrive at Chievely tomorrow at five--that is only ten miles
from where Buller is to night, so were it not for their d----d
regulations I could ride across country and join them by midday but I
bet they won't let me and I also bet I'll get there in time.  Of course
you'll, know before you see this.  Marelsburg is the capital and its
chief industry is rickshaw's pulled by wild Kaffi's, with beads and
snake skins around them and holes in their ears into which they stick
segars and horn spoons for dipping snuff.  The women wear less than the
men and have their hair done up in red fungus.

Well, love to you all, to Nora and Dad and Chas, and God bless you.

DICK.


1900.

DEAR DEAR MOTHER:--

I am here at last and counting the days when I shall get away.  War
does not soothe my savage breast.  I find I want Cecil, and Jaggers,
and Macklin to write, and plays to rehearse.  Without Cecil bored to
death at Cape Town, I would not mind it at all.  I know how to be
comfortable and on my second day I beat all these men who have been
here three months in getting my news on the wire.  For I am a news man
now, and have to collect horrid facts and hosts of casualties and to
find out whether it was the Dubblins or the Durbans that did it and
what it was they did.  I was in terrible fear that I would be too late
to see the relief of Ladysmith but I was well in time and saw a fight
the first few hours I arrived.  It is terribly big and overwhelming
like eighty of Barnum circuses all going at once in eighty rings and
very hard to understand the geography.  The Tugela is like a snake and
crosses itself every three feet so that you never know whether you have
crossed it yourself or not.  Every one is most kind and I am as
comfortable as can be.  Indeed I like my tent so much that I am going
to take it to Marion.  It has windows in it and the most amusing trap
doors and pockets in the walls and clothes lines and hooks and
ventilators-- It is colored a lovely green-- I have also two chairs
that fold up and a table that does nothing else and a bed and two
lanterns, 3 ponies, one a Boer pony I bought for  $12. from a Tommy who
had stolen it.  I had to pay $125 each for the other two and one had a
sore back and the other gets lost in my saddle.  But war as these
people do it bores one to destruction.  They are terribly dull souls.
They cannot give an order intelligently.  The real test of a soldier is
the way he gives an order.  I heard a Colonel with eight ribbons for
eight campaigns scold a private for five minutes because he could not
see a signal flag, and no one else could.  It is not becoming that a
Colonel should scold for five minutes.  Friday they charged a hill with
one of their "frontal" attacks and lost three Colonels and 500 men.  In
the morning--it was a night attack--when the roll was called only five
officers answered.  The proper number is 24.  A Captain now commands
the regiment.  It is sheer straight waste of life through dogged
stupidity.  I haven't seen a Boer yet except some poor devils of
prisoners but you can see every English who is on a hill.  They walk
along the skyline like ships on the horizon.  It must be said for them
that it is the most awful country to attack in the world.  It is
impossible to give any idea of its difficulties.  However I can tell
you that when I get back to the center of civilization.  Do you know I
haven't heard from you since I left New York on the St. Louis.  All
your letters to London went astray.  What lots you will have to tell me
but don't let Charley worry.  I won't talk about the war this time.  I
never want to hear of it again.

DICK.


LADYSMITH.  March 1st, 1899.

DEAR CHAS:

This is just a line to say I got in here with the first after a gallop
of twelve miles.  Keep this for me and the envelope.  With my love and
best wishes--

DICK.


LADYSMITH, March 3, 1900.

DEAR MOTHER:

The column came into town today, 2200 men, guns, cavalry, ambulances,
lancers, navy guns and oxen.  It was a most cruel assault upon one's
feelings.  The garrison lined the streets as a saluting guard of honor
but only one regiment could stand it and the others all sat down on the
curb only rising to cheer the head of each new regiment.  They are
yellow with fever, their teeth protruding and the skin drawn tight over
their skeletons.  The incoming army had had fourteen days hard fighting
at the end of three months campaigning but were robust and tanned
ragged and caked  with  mud.  As they came in they cheered and the
garrison tried to cheer back but it was like a whisper.

Winston Churchill and I stood in front of Gen. White and cried for an
hour.  For the time you forgot Boers and the cause, or the lack of
cause of it all, and saw only the side of it that was before you, the
starving garrison relieved by men who had lost almost one out of every
three in trying to help them.  I was rather too previous in getting in
and like every-one else who came from outside gave away everything I
had so that now I'm as badly off as the rest of them.  Yesterday my
rations for the day were four biscuits and an ounce of coffee and of
tea, with corn which they call mealies which I could not eat but which
saved my horse's life.  He is a Boer pony I bought from a Tommy for two
pounds ten and he's worth both of the other two for which I paid $125 a
piece.  Tomorrow the wagon carrying my supplies will be in and I can
get millions of things.  It almost apalls me to think how many.
Especially clean clothes.  I've slept in these for four days.  I got
off some stories which I hope will read well.  I can't complain now
that I saw the raising of this siege.  But I hope we don't stay still.
I want to see a lot quickly and get out.  This is very safe warfare.
You sit on a hill and the army does the rest.  My sciatica is not
troubling me at all.  Love to you all and God bless you.

DICK.


LADYSMITH, March 4th, 1900.

DEAR, DEAR MOTHER:

Today I got the first letter I have had from you since we left home.
It was such happiness to see your dear sweet handwriting again.  It was
just like seeing you for a glimpse, or hearing you speak.  I am so
hungry for news of Nora and Chas and you all.  I know you've written,
but the letters have missed somehow.  I sent yours right back to Cecil
who is very lonely at present.  Somerset has gone to the front and
Jim--home--Blessed word!  A little middy rode up to me today and began
by saying "I'm going home.  I'm ORDERED there.  Home-- To England!"  He
seemed to think I would not understand.  He prattled on like a child
saying what luck he had had, that he had been besieged in Ladysmith and
seen lots of fighting and would get a medal and all the while he was
"just a middy."  "But isn't it awful to think of our chaps that were
left on the ship" he said quite miserably.  It is a beastly dull war.
The whole thing is so "class" and full of "form" and tradition and
worrying over "putties" and etiquette and rank.  It is the most
wonderful organization I ever imagined but it is like a beautiful
locomotive without an engineer.

The Boers outplay them in intelligence every day.  The whole army is
officered by one class and that the dull one.  It is like the House of
Peers.  You would not believe the mistakes they make, the awful way in
which they sacrifice the lives of officers and men.  And they let the
Boers escape.  I watched the Boers for four hours the other day
escaping after the battle of Pieters and I asked, not because I wanted
them captured but just as a military proposition "Why don't you send
out your cavalry and light artillery and take those wagons?"  The staff
officer giggled and said "They might kill us."  I don't know what he
meant; neither did he.  However, I'm sick of it but there's nothing
else to talk of.  I hate all the people about me and this dirty town
and I wish I was back.  And I'm going too.  I'll have started by the
time you get this.

I mean to cut out of this soon but don't imagine I'm in any danger.
I'm taking d---d good care to keep out of danger.  No one is more
determined on that than I am.  Dear Mother, this is such a dull letter
but you must forgive me.  I was never so homesick and bored in my life.
It will be better when I go out tomorrow in my green tent and leave
this beastly hole.  I like the tent life, and the horses and being
clean.  I've really starved here for four days and haven't had a clean
thing on me.  God bless you all and dear Nora God bless her and Chas
and the Lone Fisherman.

DICK.


Outside Ladysmith.

5th March, 1900.

DEAREST MOTHER:

I was a brute to write as I did last night.  But I was so blue in that
miserable town!!!  It was so foul and dirty.  The town smelt as bad as
Johnstown.  My room in the so called hotel stunk, the dirt was all over
the floor and the servants had to be paid to do everything even to
bring you a towel--and then I had no place to write or be alone, and
nothing to eat-- The poor souls at my table who had been in the siege,
when they got a little bit of sugar or a can of condensed milk would
carry it off from the table as though it were a diamond diadem-- I did
the same thing myself for I couldn't eat what they gave me and so I
corrupted the canteen dealer and bought tin things-- I've really never
wanted tobacco so much and food as I have here--to give away I mean,
for it was something wonderful to see what it meant to them.  Three
troopers came into the dining room yesterday and asked if they could
buy some tea and were turned out so rudely that it seemed to hurt them
much more than the fact that they were hungry:  I followed them out and
begged them to come back to my verandah and have tea with me but they
at first would not because they knew I had witnessed what had happened
in the hotel.  They belonged to a very good regiment and they had been
starved for four months.  But in spite of their independence I got them
to my porch.  I had just purchased at awful prices a few delicacies
like sugar and tobacco, marmalade and a bottle of whiskey.  So I gave
them to them and I never enjoyed anything so much-- The poor yellow
faced skeletons ate in absolute silence still fighting with their pride
until I told them I was an American and was a canteen contractor's
friend-- Then I gave them segars and it was too pitiful-- In our
column, if you give a man something extra he says a lot and swears it's
the best drink or the best segar or that you're the best chap he ever
met-- Just as I say it to them when they give me things.  But these
starved bodies tried to be very polite and conversational on every
subject except food--when I offered them the segars which could only be
got then at a dollar twenty-five a piece (they had not cost me that as
I had bought them in Cape Town for two cents apiece!) What has Dad to
say to that for economy?  They accepted them quite as though it was in
Havana--and then leaned back and went off into opium dreams-- Imagine
the first segar after three months.  I am out here now on a bluff, with
two trees in front and great hills with names historical of the siege
of Ladysmith--names which I refuse to learn or remember--I am perfectly
comfortable and were it not for Cecil perfectly content-- If she were
only here it would be perfectly magnificent-- I have a retinue that
would do credit to the Warringtons in the Virginians-- Three Kaffir
boys who refuse to yield to my sense of the picturesque and go naked
like their less effete brothers, two oxen and three ponies, a little
puppy I found starved in Ladysmith and fed on compressed beef tablets.
I call her Ladysmith and she sleeps beside my cot and in my lap when I
am reading--I have also a beautiful tent with tape window panes,
ventilators, pockets inside, doors that loop up and red knobs; also, it
is green so that the ants won't eat it.  Also two tables, two chairs, a
bath tub, two lanterns, and a cape cart--and a folding bed-- In Cuba I
had two saddle bags and was just as clean and just as happy.  One boy
does nothing but polish my boots and gaiters and harness, so that I
look as well as the officers who are not much good at anything but
that.  I must tell you what I think is the saddest story of the siege--
They could not feed the horses, so they kept part of them for scouting,
part to eat and drove 3,000 of them towards the Boers.  Being, well
trained cavalry horses, they did not know how to eat grass, so at bugle
call the whole 3,000 came trotting back again and sentries were placed
at every street to stampede them back into the veldt-- One horse from
one battery met out in the prairie another horse that had been its gun
mate in an artillery regiment five years before in India and the two
poor things came galloping back side by side and passed the sentries
and into the lines and drew up beside their battery.  Another horse
found its rider acting as sentry and when the man tried to drive it
away it thought he was playing with it and kept coming back and finally
the man brought it in to the colonel and cried and asked if it might
have half of his rations of corn.  Good night and God bless you all
with all my love.

DICK.


March 15th, 1900.

DEAR MOTHER:

I am on my way back to Cape Town.  This seemed better than staying with
Buller who will not move for two or three weeks.  I shall either go
straight up to Roberts, or we will return to London.  I have seen the
relief of Ladysmith and got a very good idea of it all, and I do not
know but what I shall quit now.  I started in too late to do much with
it and as it is I have seen a great deal.  It is neither an interesting
country nor an interesting war.  But I don't have to stay here to
oblige anybody.  If I do go up to Roberts it will only be to stay for
three weeks at the most and only then if there is fighting.  I won't go
if he is resting as Buller is.  So this will explain why we start home
so soon.  I am very glad I came.  I would have been very sorry always
if I had not, but my heart is not in it as, of course, it was in our
war.  Sometimes they fight all day using seven or eight regiments and
kill a terrible lot of fine soldiers and capture forty Boer farmers and
two women.  It is not the kind of war I care to report.  "Nor mean to!"
I cannot make a book out of what little I've seen but I will come out
about even.  It has been very rough on Cecil.  Today I went to the
Maine and asked Lady Randolph to give me a lift down to Cape Town as
the ship gets there two days ahead of the Castle Steamer.  So, they
were apparently very glad to have me and I am going on Saturday.  I
like it on the ship where I have been spending the day as it is fun
taking care of the wounded and listening to their stories.  I am to
write an article for her next Anglo Saxon magazine on the Passing of
the War Correspondent.  The idea is that he must either disappear
altogether like the Vivandiere or be allowed to do his work.  As it is
now the Government forces him upon the Generals against their will and
so they get back by taking it out of him.  Either they should persuade
the Government that their objections to him are weighty and suppress
him altogether, or recognize him as a part of the outfit.  I don't much
care which as I certainly would never again go with an English army.  I
am sorry the letters home have been so dull but I have had rather hard
luck straight through, and the distances are so very great and the time
spent in covering them seems very wasteful.  I shall be glad I saw it
because it is the biggest thing as to scale that I ever saw of the
sort, and I could not have afforded to have missed being in it.  It is
the first big modern war and all the conditions and weapons are new.  I
don't think the English have learned anything by it, because the fault
lies entirely with their officers who are all or nearly all of one
class.

DICK.


March 25th, 1900.

Cape Town.

This is just to explain our plans and as they take a bit of explaining
this is meant for the Houses of Clark and of Davis.  So, pass it on--
After Ladysmith was relieved Buller decided he would not move for a
month, so I came back to join Roberts.  I could not do that on first
arriving because there was a Mail man with him.  I meant to do it later
as a Herald man, and to let The Mail go.  But on arriving here, having
spent a week in coming and having sold all my outfit at a loss, I found
that Roberts did not intend to move for three weeks either.  So I
decided I had seen enough to justify my returning.  There were other
reasons, the chief one being that the English irritated me and I had so
little sympathy with them that I could not write with any pleasure of
their work.  My sporting blood refused to boil at the spectacle of such
a monster Empire getting the worst of it from an untrained band of
farmers-- I found I admired the farmers.  So we decided to chuck it and
go to London.  I would not have missed it for anything.  I would never
have been satisfied, if we had not come.  I have seen much of the
country and the people, and of the army and its wonderful organization
and discipline.  I enjoyed two battles--and the relief of Ladysmith is
one of the things to have seen, almost the best, if not the best.
Every officer and correspondent agrees that I got the pick of the
fighting and the "best story."  By the way, I beat all the London
papers in getting out the news by one day.  At least, so Pryor, The
Mail manager tells me.  The paper was very much pleased.  We have now
decided to come home by the East Coast.  It was Cecil's idea and wish
and I was only too glad to do it.  She says we certainly will never
come to this country again.  God help us if we do--and that it would be
criminal to spend seventeen blank days on the West coast when we could
fill in the entire trip North on the East Coast at many ports.  It is a
rather complicated trip as one has to change frequently but it will be
a great thing to have seen.  Cecil has really seen nothing at Cape Town
and on this trip she will be paid for all the boredom that has gone
before.  I have been over part of it and am sure.  Durban alone is one
of the most curious cities I ever saw.  It is like the Midway at the
Fair.  I want her to have some fun out of this.  She has been so
unselfish and fine all through and I hope I can make the rest of the
adventure to her liking-- It is sure to be for after Delagoa Bay it is
all real Africa not the shoddy "colonial" shopkeepers' paradise that we
have here.  And we are going to stop off at Zanzibar for some time
where we have letters to everybody and where Cecil is to draw the
Sultan and I am to play him the "Typical Tune of Zanzibar."  You will
see by our route that we spend two days or a day at many places and so
shall get a good idea of the country.  The Konig is a 5,000 ton ship
and we have two cabins-- From Port Said we will run up to Cairo to get
a dinner and then over to Constantinople to see Lloyd Griscom and the
city which Cecil has never visited.  Then to Paris by way of the Orient
Express.  Then London and back with Charley to Aix.  I feel sure that
one more course there will cure my leg for always.  As it is it has not
touched me once even during the campaign when I was wet and had to
climb hills, and at Ladysmith, where I had no food for a week.  Of
course, if we get tired on the way up we may go straight on from Port
Said to Marseilles and so to London.  It seems funny to look upon Port
Said as being at home, but from this distance it seems as near New York
as Boston-- You will get this when we reach Zanzibar or later and we
will cable when we can.

DICK.


It was said at the time that Richard left the British forces because
the censors would not permit him to send out the truth about Buller's
advance, and that the English officials resented his going to report
the war from the Boer side.  The first statement my brother flatly
denied, and the fact that it was through the direct intervention of Sir
Alfred Milner, assisted by the efforts of our consul Adelbert S. Hay at
Pretoria, that Richard was enabled to reach the Boer capital seems to
prove the latter charge equally false.  Although throughout the war my
brother's sympathies were with the Boers, and in spite of the fact that
the papers he represented wanted him to report the war from the Boer
side, he persisted in going at first with the British forces.  His
reasons were that he wished to see a great army, with all modern
equipment in action, and that practically all of his English friends
were with the British army.  "My only reason for leaving it", he wrote,
"was the fact that I found myself facing a month of idleness.  Had
General Buller continued his advance immediately after his relief of
Ladysmith I would have gone with his column and would probably have
never seen a Boer, except a Boer prisoner."


Royal Hotel,
  Durban, Natal.

April 5th,  1900.

DEAR MOTHER:

We arrived here to-day and got off in a special tug together.  We did
the basket trick all right, although the next time it came down a swell
raised the tug and fractured every one in the basket except Sangree and
Rogers, the two New York correspondents who were hanging on by the
upper edges.  Cecil loved the place which is the Midway Plaisance of
cities and we had a good lunch and managed to get into the hotel where
there are over twenty cots in the reading room, and hall.  The
Commandant objected to our going to Praetoria and seemed inclined to
refuse us passes to leave Durban for Delagoa Bay.  He also was rather
fresh to Cecil, so I called him down very hard, and told him if he
couldn't make up his mind whether we would go or not, I'd wire to some
others who would help him to make up his mind quickly.  He said I was
at liberty to do that, so I went out and burned wires over all of South
Africa.  As he reads all the telegrams he naturally read mine and the
next morning he was as humble and white as a head waiter.  But by ten
o'clock my wires began to bear fruit and he began to catch it.  Milner
wired him to send us on at once and apologized to us by another wire so
all is well and we go vouched for by the High Commissioner.

DICK.


PRETORIA, May 18th, 1900.

DEAR DAD--AND OTHERS OF THE CLARK AND DAVIS FAMILIES:

I have not had time to write such a long letter as this one must be, as
I have been working on my Ledger and Scribner stories.

Cecil and I started to the "front," which was then May 4th, at
Brandfort with Captain Von Loosberg, a German baron who married in New
Orleans and became an American citizen and who is now in command of
Loosberg's Artillery in the Free State.  The night we left, the English
took Brandfort, so we decided to go only as far as Winburg.  The next
morning the train despatcher informed us Winburg was taken, so we
decided to go to Smalldeel, but that went during the afternoon, so we
stopped at Kronstad.  From there, after a day's rest, we went to
Ventersberg station, and rode across to Ventersberg town, about two
hours away, and put up in Jones's Hotel.  The next day we went down to
the Boer laagers on the Sand river and met President Steyn on the way.
He got out of his Cape Cart and gave Cecil a rose and Loosberg his
field glasses, which Cecil took from Loosberg in exchange for her own
Zeiss glass, and he gave me a drink and an interview.  He also gave us
a letter to St. Reid, who had established an ambulance base on Cronje's
farm, telling him to give Cecil something to sleep upon.  The, Boers
were very polite to Cecil and as she rode through the different camps
every man took off his hat.  We went back to Ventersberg that night and
about two o'clock Cecil came to my room and woke me up with the
intelligence that the British were only two hours away.  She had heard
the commandant informing the landlady, a grand low comedy character
from Brooklyn, who had the room next to Cecil's.  I interviewed the
landlady who was sitting up in bed in curl papers, and with a Webley
revolver.  She was quite hysterical so I aroused Loosberg who was too
sleepy to understand.  The commandant could be heard in the distance
offering his kingdom for a horse and a Cape cart.  Cecil and I decided
our horses were done up and that we were too ignorant of the trail to
know where to run.  So we decided to go to sleep.  In the morning we
confessed that each had been afraid the other would want to escape, and
each wanted only to be allowed to go to sleep again.  Loosberg's Cape
Cart and five mules having arrived we packed our things on it and
started again for the Sand River where we spent the night on Cronje's
farm.  Mrs. Cronje had taken away all the bedding but Dr. Reid gave
Cecil his field mattress and I made one out of rugs and piano covers.
In the morning I found that the iron straps of the mattress had marked
me for life like a grilled beefsteak.  There were only Reid and his
assistant surgeon in the farmhouse and they were greatly excited at
having a woman to look after.

We bade farewell to Loosberg who had found his artillery push, and
started off in his Cape Cart which he wished us to use and take back
for him for safety to Del Hay at Pretoria.  Our objective point was the
railroad bridge over the sand.  The Boers were on one bank, the British
about seven miles back on the other, the trail ran along the British
side of the river which was sad of it.  However, we drove on, I riding
and Cecil and Christian, the Kaffir, in the Cart.  We saw no one for
several hours except some Kaffir Kraals and we almost ran into two
herds of deer.  I counted twenty-six in one herd, they were about a
quarter of a mile away.  We came to a cross road and I decided to put
back as we had lost track of the river and were bearing straight into
the English lines.  Just as we found the river again and had got across
a drift cannon opened on our right.  We then knew we were in between
the Boers and the English but we had no other knowledge of our
geographical position.  Such being the case we decided to outspan and
lunch.  Out-spanning is setting the mules and horses at liberty,
in-spanning trying to catch them again.  It takes five minutes to
out-span, and three hours to in-span.  We had Armour's corned beef and
Libby's canned bacon.  Cecil cooked the bacon on a stick and we ate it
with biscuits captured by our Boer friends at Cronje's farm from the
English Tommies.  About three o'clock we started off again, and were
captured by three Boers.  I was riding behind the cart and threw up my
hands "that quick," but Cecil could not hear me yelling at her to stop
on account of the noise of the cart.  I knew if I rode after her they
would shoot at me, and that if she didn't stop, as they were shouting
at her to do, they would shoot her.  Under these trying circumstances I
sat still.  It caused quite a coolness on Cecil's part.  However the
Boers could see I was trying to get her to halt so they only rode
around and headed her off.  We were so glad to see them that they could
not be suspicious.  Still, as we had come directly from the English
lines they had doubts.  We told them we had lost ourselves and the more
they threatened to take us to the commandant the more satisfied we
were.  I insisted on taking photos of them reading Cecil's passport.
It annoyed them that we refused to be serious, we assured them we had
never met anyone we were so glad to see.  They finally believed us, and
our passports which describe Cecil as my "frau," and artist of Harper's
Weekly, an idea of Loosberg's.  We all smoked and then shook hands and
they went back to their positions.  We next met Christian De Vet one of
the two big generals who is a grand character.  Nothing could match the
wonderful picturesqueness of his camp spread out over the side of a
hill with the bearded fine featured old Van Dyck and Hugonot heads
under great sombreros.  De Vet made us a long speech saying it was only
to be expected that the Great Republic would send men to help the
little Republics, but he had not hoped that the women would show their
sympathy by coming too.  All this with the most simple  earnest
courtesy.  He said "No English woman would dare do what you are doing."
He showed us a farin house on a kopje about five miles off where he
said we could get shelter and where we would be near the fighting on
the morrow.  We rode in the moonlight for some time but when we reached
the house it was filthy and the people were in such terror that we
decided to camp out in the veldt.  We found a grove of trees near by
and a stream of water running beside it so we made a fire there.  We
had only one biscuit left but several cans of bacon and tea.  It was
great fun and we sat up as late as we could around the fire on account
of the cold.  We could see the Boer fires in the moonlight on the hills
and across the Sand, the English flashlights signalling all night.  We
put a rubber blanket on the grass and wrapped up in steamer rugs but
both of us died several times of cold and even sitting on the fire
failed to warm me.  We were awakened out of a cold storage sort of
sleep by pom-poms going off right over our They sounded just as
disturbing I found from the rear as when you are in front of them.
They are the most effective of all the small guns for causing your
nerves to riot.  We climbed up the hill and saw the English coming in
their usual solid formation stretching out for three miles.  We went
back and got the cart and drove to a nearer kopje, but just as we
reached it the Boers abandoned it.  Roberts's column was now much
nearer.  We then drove on still further in the direction of the bridge.
I kept telling Cecil that the firing was all from the Boers as I did
not want Christian to bolt and run away with the cart and mules.  But
Cecil remembered the pictures in Harper's Weekly showing the shrapnel
smoke making rings in the air and as she saw these floating over our
head, she knew the English were firing on us, but said nothing for fear
of scaring Christian.  I had promised to get her under fire which was
her one wish so I said that she was now well under fire for the first
and the last time.  To which she replied "Pshaw!"  I never saw any one
show such self possession.  We halted the cart behind a deserted farm
house, and saddled her pony.  The shells were now falling all over the
shop, and I was scared to distraction.  But she took about five minutes
to see that her saddle was properly tightened and then we rode up to
the hill.  Again the Boers were leaving and only a few remained.  They
warned her to keep back but we dismounted and walked up to the hill.
It was a very hot place but Cecil was quite unmoved.  We showed her the
shells striking back of her and around her but she refused to be
impressed with the danger.  She went among the Boers begging them to
make a stand very quietly and like one man to another and they took it
just in that way and said "But we are very tired.  We have been driven
back for three days.  We are only a thousand, they are twenty
thousand."  Some of them only sat still too proud to run, too sick to
fight!  When the British got within five hundred yards of the artillery
I told her she must run.  At the same moment Botha's men a mile on our
right broke away in a mad gallop, as though the lancers were after
them.  I finally got her on her pony and we raced for Ventersberg with
Christian a good first.  He had lost all desire to out-span.

At Ventersberg we found every one harnessing up in the street and
abandoning everything.  We again felt this untimely desire for food,
and had lunch at Jones's hotel on scraps and Cecil went off to see if
she could loot the cook, as everyone but her had left the hotel and as
we needed one in Pretoria.  A despatch-rider came running to me as I
was smoking in the garden and shouted that the "Roinekes" were coming
in force over the hill.  I ran out in the street and saw their shells
falling all over the edge of the village.  They were only a quarter of
an hour behind us.  I yelled for Cecil who was helping the looted cook
pack up her own things and anyone else's she could find in a sheet.  I
gathered up a dog and a kitten Cecil wanted and left a note for the
next English officer who occupied my room with the inscription "I'd
leave my happy home for you."  We then put the cook, the kitten, the
dog and Cecil in the cart and I got on the horse and we let out for
Kronstad at a gallop.  We raced the thirty miles in five hours without
one halt.  That was not our cruelty to animals but Christian's who
whenever I ordered him to halt and let us rest, yelled that the
Englesses were after us and galloped on.  The retreat was a terribly
pathetic spectacle; for hours we passed through group after group of
the broken and dispirited Boers.  At Kronstad President Steyn whom I
went to see on arriving ordered a special car for me, and sent us off
at once.  We reached here the next morning, Christian arriving a day
later having killed one mule and one pony in his eagerness to escape.
We are going back again as soon as Roberts reaches the Vaal.  There
there must be a stand.  Love and best wishes to you all----

DICK.


June 8th, 1900.

On board the Kausler.

DEAR MOTHER:

We engaged our passage on this ship some weeks ago not thinking we
would have the English near Pretoria until August.  But as it happened
they came so near that we did not know whether or not to wait over and
see them enter the capital.  I decided not, first, because after that
one event, there would be nothing for us to see or do.  We could not
leave until the 2nd of July and a month under British martial law was
very distasteful to me.  Besides I did not care much to see them enter,
or to be forced to witness their rejoicing.  As soon as we got under
way and about half the distance to the coast, it is a two days' trip.
We heard so many rumors of Roberts's communication having been cut off
and that the war was not over, that we thought perhaps we ought to go
back-- As we have no news since except that the British are in Pretoria
we still do not know what to think.  Personally I am glad I came away
as I can do just as much for the Boers at home now as there where the
British censor would have shut me off from cabling and mails are so
slow.  With the local knowledge I have, I hope to keep at it until it
is over.  But when I consider the magnitude of the misrepresentation
about the burghers I feel appalled at the idea of going up against it.
One is really afraid to tell all the truth about the Boer because no
one would believe you-- It is almost better to go mildly and then you
may have some chance.  But personally I know no class of men I admire
as much or who to-day preserve the best and oldest ideas of charity,
fairness and good-will to men.

DICK.


June 29th, 1900.

DEAR MOTHER:

We are now just off Crete, and our next sight of the blue land will be
Europe.  It means so many things; being alone with Cecil again, instead
of on a raft touching elbows with so many strangers, and it means a
shop where you can buy collars, and where they put starch in your
linen.  Also many beautiful ladies one does not know and men in evening
dress one does not know and green tables covered with gold and little
green and red bits of ivory where one passes among the tables and
wonders what they would think if they knew we two had found our
greatest friends in the Boer farmers, in Dutch Station Masters who gave
us a corner under the telegraph table in which to sleep, with Nelson
who kept the Transvaal Steam Laundry, Col. Lynch of the steerage who
comes to the dividing line to beg French books from Cecil, and that we
had cooked our food on sticks, drunk out of the same cups with Kaffir
servants and slept on the ground when there was frost on it.  It will
be so strange to find that there are millions of people who do not know
Komali poort, who have thought of anything else except burghers and
roor-i-neks-- It seems almost disloyal to the Boers to be glad to see
newspapers only an hour old instead of six weeks old, and to welcome
all the tyranny of collar buttons, scarf pins, watch chains, walking
sticks and gloves even.  I love them both and I can hardly believe it
is true that we are to go to a real hotel with a lift and a chasseur,
where you cannot smoke in the dining-room.  As for Aix, that I cannot
believe will ever happen-- It was just a part of one's honeymoon and I
refuse to cheat myself into thinking that within a week I will be
riding through the lanes of the little villages, drinking red wine at
Burget, watching Chas spread cheese over great hunks of bread and
listening to three bands at one time.  And then the joy to follow of
Home and America and all that is American.  Even the Custom House holds
nothing but joy for me--and then "mine own people!"  It has been six
weeks since we have heard from you or longer, nearly two months and how
I miss you and want you.  It will be a happy day when Dad meets me at
the wharf and I can see his blue and white tie again and his dear face
under the white hat--where you and Nora will be I cannot tell, but I
will seek you out.  We will be happy together--so happy-- It has been
the longest separation we have known and such a lot of things have
happened.  It will be such peace to see you and hold you once again.

DICK.


AIX-LES-BAINS.

July 6th, 1900.

DEAR FAMILY:

Cecil and I arrived last night tired and about worn out--we had had a
month on board ship and two days in the cars and when we got out at Aix
and found our rooms ready and Francois waiting, we shouted and cheered.
It was never so beautiful as it looked in the moonlight and we walked
all over it, through the silent streets chortling with glee.  They
could not give us our same rooms but we got the suite just above them,
which is just as good.  They were so extremely friendly and glad to see
us and had flowers in all the rooms.  We have not heard a word about
Chas yet, as our mail has not arrived from Paris, but I will cable in a
minute and hear.  We cannot wait any longer for news of him.  I got up
at seven this morning so excited that I could not sleep and have been
to the baths, where I was received like the President of the Republic.
In fact everybody seems to have only the kindest recollections of us
and to be glad to have us back.

Such a rest as it is and so clean and bright and good--Only I have
absolutely nothing to wear except a two pound flannel suit I bought at
Lorenzo Marquez until I get some built by a French tailor.  I must wear
a bath robe or a bicycle suit until evening.  We have not been to the
haunts of evil yet but we are dining there to night and all will be
well.  Cecil sends her love to you all-- Goodbye and God bless you.



Richard and his wife returned to America in the early fall of 1900 and,
after a visit to Mr. and Mrs. Clark at Marion, settled for the winter
in New York.  They took a house in East Fifty-eighth Street where they
did much entertaining and lived a very social existence, but I do not
imagine that either of them regarded the winter as a success.  Richard
was unable to do his usual amount of work, and both he and his wife
were too fond of the country to enjoy an entire winter in town.  In the
spring they went back to Marion.


MARION,
  MASSACHUSETTS.  May, 1901.

We arrived here last night in a glowing sunset which was followed by a
grand moon.  The house was warm and clean and bright, with red curtains
and open fires and everything was just as we had left it, so that it
seemed as though we had just come out of a tortuous bad dream of
asphalt and L. roads and bad air.  I was never so glad to get away from
New York.

Outside it is brisk and fine and smells of earth and melting snow and
there is a grand breeze from the bay.  We took a long walk to-day, with
the three dogs, and it was pitiful to see how glad they were to be free
of the cellar and a back yard and at large among grass and rocks and
roots of trees.  I wanted to bottle up some of the air and send it to
all of my friends in New York.  It is so much better to smell than
hot-house violets.  Seaton came on with us to handle the dogs and to
unpack and so to-day we are nearly settled already with silver,
pictures, clothes and easels and writing things all in place.  The
gramophone is whirling madly and all is well-- Lots and lots of love.

DICK.


The following was written by Richard to his mother on her birthday:

MARION, MASSACHUSETTS.

June 27th, 1901.

DEAR MOTHER:

In those wonderful years of yours you never thought of the blessing you
were to us, only of what good you could find in us.  All that time, you
were helping us and others, and making us better, happier, even nobler
people.  From the day you struck the first blow for labor, in The Iron
Mills on to the editorials in The Tribune, The Youth's Companion and
The Independent, with all the good the novels, the stories brought to
people, you were always year after year making the ways straighter,
lifting up people, making them happier and better.  No woman ever did
better for her time than you and no shrieking suffragette will ever
understand the influence you wielded, greater than hundreds of
thousands of women's votes.

We love you dear, dear mother, and we KNOW you and may your coming
years be many and as full of happiness for yourself as they are for us.

RICHARD.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SPANISH AND ENGLISH CORONATIONS

Interrupted by frequent brief visits to New York Philadelphia, and
Boston, Richard and his wife remained in Marion from May, 1901, until
the early spring of 1902.  During this year Richard accomplished a
great deal of work and lived an ideal existence.  In the summer months
there were golf and tennis and an army of visitors, and during the
winter many of their friends came from New York to enjoy a most
charming hospitality and the best of duck shooting and all kinds of
winter sports.

Late in April, they sailed for Gibraltar on their way to Madrid, where
Richard was to report the coronation ceremonies, and from Madrid they
went to Paris and then to London to see the coronation of King Edward.
It was while on a visit to the Rudyard Kiplings that they heard the
news that Edward had been suddenly stricken with a serious illness and
that the ceremony had been postponed.


11, St. James's Place,
  St. James's Street, S. W.
    London.

June, 1902.

DEAR MOTHER:--

This is only to say that at the Kipling's we heard the news, and being
two newspaper men, refused to believe it and went to the postoffice of
the little village to call up Brighton on the 'phone.  It was very
dramatic, the real laureate of the British Empire asking if the King
were really in such danger that he could not be crowned, while the
small boy in charge of the grocery shop, where the postoffice was, wept
with his elbows on the counter.  They sent me my ticket--unasked--for
the Abbey, early this morning, and while I was undecided whether to
keep it--or send it back, this came.  So, now, I shall frame it as a
souvenir of one of the most unhappy occasions I ever witnessed.  You
can form no idea of what a change it has made.  It really seems to have
stunned every one--that is the usual and accepted word, but this time
it describes it perfectly.

Goodbye,
  DICK.


During the summer of 1903 my mother and father occupied a cottage at
Marion, and every morning Richard started the day by a visit to them.
My brother had already bought his Crossroads Farm at Mount Kisco, and
the new house was one of the favorite topics of their talk.  The
following letter was written by my mother to Richard, after her return
to Philadelphia.


September, 1903.

Here we are in the old library and breakfast over.  There seemed an
awful blank in the world as I sat down just now, and I said to Dad "Its
Dick--he must come THIS morning."

You don't know how my heart used to give a thump when you and Bob came
in that old door.  It has been such a good month--everybody was so
friendly--and Dad was so well and happy--but your visits were the core
of it all.  And our good drives!  Well we'll have lots of drives at the
Crossroads.  You'll call at our cottage every morning and I'm going to
train the peacocks to run before the trap and I'll be just like Juno.

There isn't a scrap of news.  It is delightfully cool here.

M.




CHAPTER XIV

THE JAPANESE-RUSSIAN WAR

During the fall and early winter of 1903 Richard and his wife lingered
on in Marion, but came to New York after the Christmas holidays.  The
success of his farce "The Dictator" had been a source of the greatest
pleasure to Richard, and he settled down to playwriting with the same
intense zeal he put into all of his work.  However, for several years
Robert J.  Collier and my brother had been very close friends, and
Richard had written many articles and stories for Collier's Weekly, so
that when Collier urged my brother to go to the Japanese-Russian War as
correspondent with the Japanese forces, Richard promptly gave up his
playwriting and returned to his old love--the role of reporter.
Accompanied by his wife, Richard left New York for San Francisco in
February.


February, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

We are really off on the "long trail" bound for the boundless East.  We
have a charming drawing-room, a sympathetic porter and a courtly
conductor descended from one of the first Spanish conquerors of
California.  We arranged the being late for lunch problem by having
dinner at five and cutting the lunch out.  Bruce and Nan came over for
dinner and we had a very jolly time.  They all asked after you all, and
drank to our re-union at Marion in July.  Later they all tried to come
with us on the train.  It looked so attractive with electric lights in
each seat, and observation car and library.  A reporter interviewed us
and Mr. Clark gave us a box of segars and a bottle of whiskey.  But
they will not last, as will Dad's razors and your housewife.  I've used
Dad's razors twice a day, and they still are perfect.  It's snowing
again, but we don't care.  They all came to the station to see us off
but no one cried this time as they did when we went to South Africa.
Somehow we cannot take this trip seriously.  It is such a holiday trip
all through not grim and human like the Boer war.  Just quaint and
queer.  A trip of cherry blossoms and Geisha girls.  I send all my love
to you.

DICK.


SAN FRANCISCO, February 26th.

DEAR MOTHER:

We got in here last night at midnight just as easily as though we were
coming into Jersey City.  Before we knew it we had seen the Golden
Gate, and were snug in this hotel.  Today as soon as we learned we
could not sail we started in to see sights and we made a record and
hung it up high.  We went to the Cliff House and saw the seals on the
rocks below, to the Park, the military reservation, Chinatown, and the
Poodle Dog Restaurant.  We also saw the Lotta monument, the Stevenson
monument, the Spreckles band stand, the place where the Vigilance
Committee hung the unruly, and tonight I went to a dinner the Bohemian
Club gave to the War correspondents.  I made a darned good speech.
Think of ME making a speech of any sort, but I did, and I had sense
enough not to talk about the war but the "glorious climate of
California" instead and of all the wonders of Frisco.  So, I made a
great hit.  It certainly is one of the few cities that lives up to it's
reputation in every way.  I should call it the most interesting city,
with more character back of it than any city on this continent.  There
are only four deck rooms and we each have one.  The boat is small, but
in spite of the crowd that is going on her, will I think be
comfortable.  I know it will be that, and it may be luxurious.

DICK.


On way to Japan.

March 13th, 1904.

About four this afternoon we saw an irregular line of purple mountains
against a yellow sky, and it was Japan.  In spite of the Sunday papers,
and the interminable talk on board, the guide books and maps which had
made Japan nauseous to me, I saw the land of the Rising Sun with just
as much of a shock and thrill as I first saw the coast of Africa.  We
forgot entirely we had been twenty days at sea and remembered only that
we were ten miles from Japan, only as far as New Bedford is from
Marion.  We are at anchor now, waiting to go in in the morning.  Were
it not for war we could go in now but we must wait to be piloted over
the sunken mines.  That and the flashlights moving from the cruisers
ten miles away gave us our first idea of war.  To-morrow early we will
be off for Tokio, as it is only forty miles from Yokohama.  Of course,
I may get all sorts of news before we land, but that is what we expect
to do.  It will be good to feel solid earth, and to see the kimonos and
temples and geishas and cherry blossoms.  I am almost hoping the
Government won't let us go to the front and that for a week at least
Cecil and I can sit in tea houses with our shoes off while the nesans
bring us tea and the geishas rub their knees and make bows to us.  I am
sending you through Harper's, a book on Hawaii and one of Japan that I
have read and like and which I think will help you to keep in touch
with the wanderers.  With all my love to all.

DICK.


TOKYO, March 22nd, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

The "situation" here continues to remain in such doubt that I cannot
tell of it, as it changes hourly.  There are three "columns," so far
existing only in imagination.  That is, so far as they concern the
correspondents.  The first lot have chosen themselves, and so have the
second lot.  But the first lot are no nearer starting than they were
two weeks ago.  I may be kept waiting here for weeks and weeks.  I do
not like to turn out Palmer, although I very much want to go with the
first bunch.  On the other hand I am paid pretty well to get to the
front, and I am uncertain as to what I ought to do.  If the second
column were to start immediately after the first, we then would have
two men in the field, but if it does not, then Collier will be paying
$1000. a week for stories of tea houses and "festivals."  Palmer
threatens to resign if I take his place in the first column and that
would be a loss to the paper that I do not feel I could make up.  If it
gets any more complicated I'll wire Collier to decide.

Meanwhile, we are going out to dinners and festivals and we ride.  I
have a good pony the paper paid for Cecil has hired another and we find
it delightful to scamper out into the country.  We have three rooms in
a row.  One we use for a sitting room.  They look very welland as it is
still cold we keep them cheerful with open fires.  We have a table in
the dining-room to ourselves and to which we can ask our friends.  The
food is extremely good.  Griscom and the Secretaries have all called
and sent pots of flowers, and we are dining out every other night.  In
the day we shop and ride.  But all day and all night we the
correspondents plot and slave and intrigue over the places on the
columns.  I got mine on the second column all right but no one knows if
it ever will move.  So, naturally, I want to be on the first.  The rows
are so engrossing that I have not enjoyed the country as I expected.
Still, I am everlastingly glad we came.  It is an entirely new life and
aspect.  It completes so much that we have read and seen.  In spite of
the bother over the war passes I learn things daily and we see
beautiful and curious things, and are educated as to the East, as no
books could have done it for us.  John Bass who was my comrade in arms
in Greece and his wife are here.  They are the very best.  Also we see
Lloyd daily, and the hotel is full of amusing men, who are trying to
get to the front.  Of course, we know less of the war than you do.
None of the news from Cheefoo, none of the "unauthorized" news reaches
us.  Were it not for our own squabbles we would not know not only that
the country was at war but not even that war existed ANYWHERE in the
world.  We are here entirely en tourist and it cannot be helped.  The
men who tried to go with the Russians are equally unfortunate.  Think
of us as wandering around each with a copy of Murray seeing sights.
That is all we really do,  All my love.

DICK.


YOKOHAMA--April 2, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

I just got your letter dated the 28th of February and the days
following in which you worried over me in the ice coated trenches of
Korea.  I read it in a rickshaw in a warm sun on my way to buy favors
for a dinner to Griscom.  We have had three warm days and no doubt the
sun will be out soon.  The loss of the sun, though, is no great one.
We have lots of pleasures and lots of troubles in spite of the Sun.
Yesterday the first batch of correspondents were sent on their way.  I
doubt if they will get any further than Chemulpo but their going
cheered the atmosphere like a storm in summer.  The diplomats and
Japanese were glad to get rid of them, they were delighted to be off.
Some had been here 58 days, and we all looked at it as a good sign as
it now puts us "next."  But after they had gone it was pretty blue for
some of them were as good friends as I want.  I know few men I like as
well as I do John Bass.  Many of them were intensely interesting.  It
was, by all odds, the crowd one would have wished to go with.  As it
is, I suspect we all will meet again and that the two columns will be
merged on the Yalu.  None of the attaches have been allowed to go, so
it really is great luck for the correspondents.  Tell Chas I still am
buying my Kit.  It's pretty nearly ready now.  I began in New York and
kept on in Boston, San Francisco, and here.  It always was my boast
that I had the most complete kit in the world, and in spite of
Charley's jeers at my lack of preparedness everybody here voted it the
greatest ever seen.  For the last ten days all the Jap saddlers, tent
makers and tinsmiths have been copying it.

DICK.


TOKIO--May 2, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

Today, we walked into our new house and tomorrow we will settle down
there.  We rented the furniture for the two unfurnished rooms; knives,
forks, spoons, china for the table and extras for 35 dollars gold for
two months.  It took six men to bring the things in carts.  They got
nothing.  Yesterday, I took two rickshaw men from half past twelve to
half past five.  Out of that time they ran and pushed me for two solid
hours.  Their price for the five hours was eighty cents gold.  What you
would pay a cabman to drive you from the Waldorf to Martin's.  I wish
you could see our menage.  Such beautiful persons in grey silk kimonos
who bow, and bow and slip and slide in spotless torn white stockings
with one big toe.  They make you ashamed of yourself for walking on
your own carpet in your own shoes.  Today we got the first news of the
battle on the Yalu, the battle of April 26-30th.  I suppose Palmer and
Bass saw it; and I try to be glad I did what was right by Collier's
instead of for myself.  But I don't want to love another paper.  I
suppose there will be other fights but that one was the first, and it
must have been wonderful.  On the 4th we expect to be on our way to
Kioto with Lloyd and his wife and John Fox.  By that time we expect to
be settled in the new house.

DICK.


TOKIO, May 22nd, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

You will be glad to hear that the correspondents at the front are not
allowed within two and a half miles of the firing line.  This I am sure
you will approve.  Their tales of woe have just been received here, and
they certainly are having a hard time.  The one thing they all hope for
is that the Japs will order them home.  My temper is vile to-day, as I
cannot enjoy the gentle pleasures of this town any longer and with this
long trip to Port Arthur before I can turn towards home.  I am as cross
as a sick bear.  We were at Yokohama when your last letters came and
they were a great pleasure.  I got splendid news of The Dictator.
Yesterday we all went to Yokohama.  There are four wild American boys
here just out of Harvard who started the cry of "Ping Yang" for the
"Ping Yannigans" they being the "Yannigans."  They help to make things
very lively and are affectionately regarded by all classes.  Yesterday,
they and Fox and Cecil and I went to the races, with five ricksha boys
each, and everybody lost his money except myself.  But it was great
fun.  It rained like a seive, and all the gentlemen riders fell off,
and every time we won money our thirty ricksha men who would tell when
we won by watching at which window we had bet, would cheer us and
salaam until to save our faces we had to scatter largesses.  Egan
turned up in the evening and dined with John and Cecil and me in the
Grand Hotel and told us first of all the story the correspondents had
brought back to Kobbe for which every one from the Government down has
been waiting.  It would make lively reading if any of us dared to write
it.  To-day he made his protests to Fukushima as we mapped them out
last night and the second lot will I expect be treated better.  But, as
the first lot were the important men representing the important
syndicates the harm, for the Japs, has been done.  Of course, much they
do is through not knowing our points of view.  To them none of us is of
any consequence except that he is a nuisance, and while they are
conversationally perfect in politeness, the regulations they inflict
are too insulting.  However, you don't care about that, and neither do
I.  I am going to earn my money if I possibly can, and come home.

DICK.


TOKIO, June 13th, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

We gave a farewell dinner last night to the Ping Yannigans two of whom
left on the Navy expedition and another one to-morrow for God's
country.  There were eight men and we had new lanterns painted with the
arms of Corea and the motto of the Ping Yannigans.  Also many flags.
All but the Japanese flag.  One of them with a side glance at the
servants said, "Gentleman and Lady:  I propose a toast, Japan for the
Japanese and the Japanese for Japan."  We all knew what he meant but
the servants were greatly pleased.  Jack London turned up to-day on his
way home.  I liked him very much.  He is very simple and modest and
gave you a tremendous impression of vitality and power.  He is very
bitter against the wonderful little people and says he carries away
with him only a feeling of irritation.  But I told him that probably
would soon wear off and he would remember only the pleasant things.  I
did envy him so, going home after having seen a fight and I not yet
started.  Still THIS TIME we may get off.  Yokoyama the contractor
takes our stuff on the 16th, and so we feel it is encouraging to have
our luggage at the front even if we are here.

DICK.


YOKOHAMA, July 26th, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

We gave in our passes to-day, and sail to-morrow at five.  They say we
are not to see Port Arthur fall but are to be taken up to Oku's army.
That means we miss the "popular" story, and may have to wait around
several weeks before we see the other big fight.  They promised us Port
Arthur but that is reason enough for believing they do not intend we
shall see it at all.  John and I are here at a Japanese hotel, the one
Li Hung Chang occupied when he came over to arrange the treaty between
China and Japan.  It is a very beautiful house, the best I have seen of
real Japanese and the garden and view of the harbor is magnificent.  I
wish Cecil could see it too, but I know she would not care for a room
which is as free to the public view as the porch at Marion.  It has 48
mats and as a mat is 3 x 5 you can work it out.  We eat, sleep and
dress in this room and it is like trying to be at home on top of a
Chickering Grand.  But it is very beautiful and the moonlight is fine
and saddening.  No one of us has the least interest in the war or in
what we may see or be kept from seeing.  We have been "over trained"
and not even a siege of London could hold our thoughts from home.  I
have just missed the mail which would have told me you were at Marion.
I should so love to have heard from you from there.  I do not think you
will find the Church house uncomfortable; and you can always run across
the road when the traffic is not too great, and chat with Benjamin.  I
do hope that Dad will have got such good health from Marion and such
lashers of fish.  I got a good letter from Charles and I certainly feel
guilty at putting extra work on a man as busy as he.  Had I known he
was the real judge of those prize stories I would have sent him one
myself and given him the name of it.  Well, goodbye for a little time.
We go on board in a few hours, and after that everything I write you is
read by the Censor so I shall not say anything that would gratify their
curiosity.  They think it is unmanly to write from the field to one's
family and the young princes forbade their imperial spouses from
writing them until the war is over.  However, not being an imperial
Samaari but a home loving, family loving American, I shall miss not
hearing very much, and not being able to tell you all how I love you.

DICK.



DALNY, July 27th, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

We left Shimonoseki three days ago and have had very pleasant going on
the Heijo Maru a small but well run ship of 1,500 tons.  Fox and I got
one of the two best rooms and I have been very comfortable.  We are at
anchor now at a place of no interest except for its sunsets.

We have just been told as the anchor is being lowered that we can send
letters back by the Island, so I can just dash this off before leaving.
We have reached Dalny and I have just heard the first shot fired which
was to send me home.  All the others came and bid John and me a
farewell as soon as we were sure it was the sound of cannon.  However,
as it is 20 miles away I'll have to hang on until I get a little
nearer.  We have had a very pleasant trip even though we were delayed
two days by fog and a slow convoy.  Now we are here at Dalny.  It looks
not at all like its pictures, which, as I remember them were all taken
in winter.  It is a perfectly new, good brick barracks-like town. I am
landing now.  The two servants seem very satisfactory and I am in
excellent health.  Today Cecil has been four days at Hong Kong.  Please
send the gist of this letter dull as it is to Mrs. Clark.  When I began
it I thought I would have plenty of time to finish it on shore.  Of
course, after this all I write and this too, I suppose will be
censored.  So, there will not be much liveliness.  I have no taste to
expose my affections to the Japanese staff.  So, goodbye.

R.



July 31st, 1904.

DEAR MOTHER:

We have been met here with a bitter disappointment.  We are all to be
sent north, although only 18 hours away.  We can hear the guns at Port
Arthur the fall of which they promised us we would see.  To night we
are camping out in one of the Russian barracks.  To-morrow we go,
partly by horse and partly by train.  A week must elapse before we can
get near headquarters.  And then we have no guarantee that we will see
any fighting.  This means for me a long delay.  It is very
disappointing and the worst of the many we have suffered in the last
four months.  I have written Cecil asking her to seriously think of
going home but I am afraid she will not.  Were it not for that and the
disappointment one feels in travelling a week's journey away from the
sound of guns I would be content.  My horse is well and so am I.  It is
good to get back to drawing water, and carrying baggage and skirmishing
about for yourself.  The contractor gave us a good meal and the
servants are efficient but I like doing things myself and skirmishing
for them.  We make a short ride this morning of six miles to Kin Chow
and then 30 miles by rail.  "Headquarters" is about a five days ride
distant.  Tell Chas my outfit seems nearly complete.  Maybe I can buy a
few things I forgot in Boston at Kin Chow.  Fox and I will get out just
as soon as we see fighting but before you get this you will probably
hear by cable from me.  If not, it will mean we still are waiting for a
fight.  The only mistake I made was in not going home the first time
they deceived us instead of waiting for this and worst of all.

to you all.

DICK.


MANCHURIA, August 14, 1904.

We have been riding through Manchuria for eleven days.  Nine days we
rode then two days we rested.  By losing the trail we managed to
average about 20 miles a day.  I kept well and enjoyed it very much.
As I had to leave my servant behind with a sick horse, I had to take
care of my mule and pony myself and hunt fodder for them, so I was
pretty busy.  Saiki did all he could, but he is not a servant and
sooner than ask him I did things myself.  We passed through a very
beautiful country, sleeping at railway stations and saw two battle
fields of recent fights.  Now we are in a Chinese City and waiting to
see what should be the biggest fight since Sedan.  The Russians are
about ten miles from us, so we are not allowed outside the gates of the
city without a guide.  Of course, we have none of that freedom we have
enjoyed in other wars, but apart from that they treat us very well
indeed.  And in a day or two they promise us much fighting, which we
will be allowed to witness from a hill.  This is a very queer old city
but the towns and country are all very primitive and we depend upon
ourselves for our entertainment.  I expect soon to see you at home.  In
three more days I shall have been out here five months and that is too
long.  Good luck to you all.

R. H. D.


MANCHURIA, August 18th, 1904.

We still are inside this old Chinese town.  It has rained for five
days, and this one is the first in which we could go abroad.  Unless
you swim very well it is not safe to cross one of these streets.  We
have found an old temple and some of us are in it now.  It is such a
relief to escape from that compound and the rain.  This place is full
of weeds and pine trees, cooing doves and butterflies.  The temples are
closed and no one is in charge but an aged Chinaman.  We did not come
here to sit in temples, so John and I will leave in a week, battle or
no battle.  The argument that having waited so long one might as well
wait a little longer does not touch us.  It was that argument that kept
us in Tokio when we knew we were being deceived weekly, and the same
man who deceived us there, is in charge here.  It is impossible to
believe anything he tells his subordinates to tell us, so, we will be
on our way back when you get this.  I am well, and only disappointed.
Had they not broken faith with us about Port Arthur we would by now
have seen fighting.  As it is we will have wasted six months.

Love to Dad, and Chas and Nora and you.

DICK.


In writing of his decision to leave the Japanese army, Richard, after
his return to the United States, said:

"On the receipt of Oku's answer to the Correspondents we left the army.
Other correspondents would have quit then, as most of them did ten days
later, but that their work and Kuroki, so far from being fifty miles
north toward Mukden, as Okabe said he was, was twenty miles to the east
on our right preparing for the, closing-in movement which was just
about to begin.  Three days after we had left the army, the greatest
battle since Sedan was waged for six days.

"So, our half-year of time and money, of dreary waiting, of daily
humiliations at the hands of officers with minds diseased by suspicion,
all of which would have been made up to us by the sight of this one
great spectacle, was to the end absolutely lost to us.  Perhaps we made
a mistake in judgment.  As the cards fell we certainly did.

"The only proposition before us was this:  There was small chance of
any immediate fighting.  If there were fighting we would not see it.
Confronted with the same conditions again, I would decide in exactly
the same manner.  Our misfortune lay in the fact that our experience
with other armies had led us to believe that officers and gentlemen
speak the truth, that men with titles of nobility, and with the higher
titles of General and Major-General, do not lie.  In that we were
mistaken."

Greatly disappointed at his failure to see really anything of the war,
much embittered at the Japanese over their treatment of the
correspondents, Richard reached Vancouver in October.  As my father was
seriously ill he came to Philadelphia at once and divided the next two
months between our old home and Marion.

On December 14, 1904, my father died, and it was the first tragedy that
had come into Richard's life, as it was in that of my sister or myself.
As an editorial writer, most of my father's work had been anonymous,
but his influence had been as far-reaching as it had been ever for all
that was just and fine.  All of his life he had worked unremittingly
for good causes and, in spite of the heavy burdens which of his own
will he had taken upon his none too strong shoulders, I have never met
with a nature so calm , so simple, so sympathetic with those who were
weak--weak in body or soul.  As all newspaper men must, he had been
brought in constant contact with the worst elements of machine
politics, as indeed he had with the lowest strata of the life common to
any great city.  But in his own life he was as unsophisticated; his
ideals of high living, his belief in the possibilities of good in all
men and in all women, remained as unruffled as if he had never left his
father's farm where he had spent his childhood.  When my father died
Richard lost his "kindest and severest critic" as he also lost one of
his very closest friends and companions.

During the short illness that preceded my brother's death, although
quite unconscious that the end was so near, his thoughts constantly
turned back to the days of his home in Philadelphia, and he got out the
letters which as a boy and as a young man he had written to his family.
After reading a number of them he said:  "I know now why we were such a
happy It was because we were always, all of us, of the same age."




CHAPTER XV

MOUNT KISCO

During my brother's life there were four centres from which he set
forth on his travels and to which he returned to finish the articles
for which he had collected the material, or perhaps to write a novel, a
few short stories, or occasionally a play, but unlike most of the
followers of his craft, never to rest.  Indeed during the last
twenty-five years of his life I do not recall two consecutive days when
Richard did not devote a number of hours to literary work.  The centres
of which I speak were first Philadelphia, then New York, then Marion,
and lastly Mount Kisco.  Happy as Richard had been at Marion, the
quaint little village, especially in winter, was rather inaccessible,
and he realized that to be in touch with the numerous affairs in which
he was interested that his headquarters should be in or near New York.
In addition to this he had for long wanted a home of his very own, and
so located that he could have his family and his friends constantly
about him.  Some years, however, elapsed between this dream and its
realization.  In 1903 he took the first step by purchasing a farm
situated in the Westchester Hills, five miles from Mount Kisco, New
York.  He began by building a lake at the foot of the hill on which the
home was to stand, then a water-tower, and finally the house itself.
The plans to the minutest detail had been laid out on the lawn at
Marion and, as the architect himself said, there was nothing left for
him to do but to design the cellar.

Richard and his wife moved into their new home in July, 1905, and
called it Crossroads Farm, keeping the original name of the place.  In
later years Richard added various adjoining parcels of land to his
first purchase, and the property eventually included nearly three
hundred acres.  The house itself was very large, very comfortable, and
there were many guest-rooms which every week-end for long were filled
by the jolliest of house-parties.  In his novel "The Blind Spot,"
Justus Miles Forman gives the following very charming picture of the
place:

"It was a broad terrace paved with red brick that was stained and a
little mossy, so that it looked much older than it had any right to,
and along its outer border there were bay-trees set in big Italian
terracotta jars; but the bay-trees were placed far apart so that they
should not mask the view, and that was wise, for it was a fine view.
It is rugged country in that part of Westchester County--like a choppy
sea: all broken, twisted ridges, and abrupt little hills, and piled-up
boulders, and hollow, cup-like depressions among them.  The Grey house
sat, as it were, upon the lip of a cup, and from the southward terrace
you looked across a mile or two of hollow bottom, with a little lake at
your feet, to sloping pastures where there were cattle browsing, and to
the far, high hills beyond.

"There was no magnificence about the outlook--nothing to make you catch
your breath; but it was a good view with plenty of elbow room and no
sign of a neighbor--no huddling--only the water of the little lake, the
brown November hillsides, and the clean blue sky above.  The distant
cattle looked like scenic cattle painted on their green-bronze pasture
to give an aspect of husbandry to the scene."

Although Richard was now comfortably settled, he had of late years
acquired a great dread of cold weather.  As soon as winter set in his
mind turned to the tropics, and whenever it was possible he went to
Cuba or some other land where he was sure of plenty of heat and
sunshine.  The early part of 1906 found him at Havana, this time on a
visit to the Hon. E. V.  Morgan, who was then our minister to Cuba.
From Havana he went to the Isle of Pines.


ISLE OF PINES, March 26th, 1906.

DEAR MOTHER:--

We are just returning from the Isle of Pines.  We reached there after a
day on the water at about six on Wednesday, 22nd.  They dropped us at a
woodshed in a mangrove swamp, where a Mr. Mason met us with two mules.
I must have said I was going to the island because every one was
expecting me.  Until the night before we had really no idea when we
would go, so, to be welcomed wherever we went, was confusing.  For four
days we were cut off from the world, and in that time, five days in
all, we covered the entire island pretty thoroughly-- It was one of the
most interesting trips I ever took and Cecil enjoyed it as much as I
did.  The island is a curious mixture of palm and pines, one minute it
looks like Venezuela and the next like Florida and Lakewood.  It is
divided into two parties of Americans, the "moderates" and the
"revolutionists."  The Cubans are very few and are all employed by the
Americans, who own nine-tenths of the Island.  Of course, they all want
the U. S. to take it, they differ only as to how to persuade the
senators to do it.  I had to change all my opinions about the
situation.  I thought it was owned by land speculators who did not live
there, nor wish to live there, but instead I found every one I met had
built a home and was cultivating the land.  We gave each land company a
turn at me, and we had to admire orange groves and pineapples,
grapefruit and coffee until we cried for help.  With all this was the
most romantic history of the island before the "gringos" came.  It was
a famous place for pirates and buried treasures and slave pens.  It was
a sort of clearing house for slaves where they were fattened.  I do not
believe people take much interest in or know anything about it, but I
am going to try and make an interesting story of it for Collier.  It
was queer to be so completely cut off from the world.  There was a
wireless but they would not let me use it.  It is not yet opened to the
public.  I talked to every one I met and saw much that was pathetic and
human.  It was the first pioneer settlement Cecil had ever seen and the
American making the ways straight is very curious.  He certainly does
not adorn whatever he touches.  But never have I met so many
enthusiastics and such pride in locality.  To-night we reach the Hotel
Louvre, thank heaven! where I can get Spanish food again, and not
American ginger bread, and, "the pie like mother used to make."  We now
are on a wretched Spanish tug boat with every one, myself included,
very seasick and babies howling and roosters crowing.  But soon that
will be over, and, after a short ride of thirty miles through a
beautiful part of the island, we will be in Havana in time for a fine
dinner, with ice.  What next we will do I am not sure.  After living in
that beautiful palace of Morgan's, it just needed five days of the
"Pinero's" to make us enjoy life at a hotel-- If we can make
connections, I think I will go over to Santo Domingo, and study up that
subject, too.  But, even if we go no where else the trip to the I. of
P.  was alone well worth our long journey.  I don't know when I have
seen anything as curious, and as complicated a political existence.
Love to all of you dear ones.

DICK.


HAVANA--April 9, 1906.

ARTHUR BARTLETT MAURICE, ESQ.

MY DEAR MAURICE:

I have just read about myself, in the April Bookman, which I would be
very ungrateful if I did not write and tell you how much it pleased me.
That sounds as though what pleased me was, obviously, that what you
said was so kind.  But what I really mean, and that for which I thank
you, was your picking out things that I myself liked, and that I would
like to think others liked.  I know that the men make "breaks," and am
sorry for it, but, I forget to be sorry when you please me by pointing
out the good qualities in "Laquerre," and the bull terrier.  Nothing
ever hurt me so much as the line used by many reviewers of "Macklin"
that "Mr.  Davis' hero is a cad, and Mr. Davis cannot see it."  Macklin
I always thought was the best thing I ever did, and it was the one over
which I took the most time and care.  Its failure was what as Maggie
Cline used to say, "drove me into this business" of play writing.  All
that ever was said of it was that it was "A book to read on railroad
trains and in a hammock."  That was the verdict as delivered to me by
Romeike from 300 reviewers, and it drove me to farces.  So, I was
especially glad when you liked "Royal Macklin."  I tried to make a
"hero" who was vain, theatrical, boasting and selfconscious, but, still
likable.  But, I did not succeed in making him of interest, and it
always has hurt me.  Also, your liking the "Derelict" and the "Fever
Ship" gave me much pleasure.  You see what I mean, it was your
selecting the things upon which I had worked, and with which I had made
every effort, that has both encouraged and delighted me.  Being
entirely unprejudiced, I think it is a fine article, and as soon as I
stamp this, I will read it over again.  So, thank you very much,
indeed, for to say what you did seriously, over your own name, took a
lot of courage, and for that daring, and for liking the same things I
do, I thank you many times.

Sincerely yours,

RICHARD HARDING DAVIS.


In reading this over, I find all I seem to have done in it is to
complain because no one, but yourself and myself liked "Macklin."  What
I wanted to say is, that I am very grateful for the article, for the
appreciation, although I don't deserve it, and for your temerity in
saying so many kind things.  Nothing that has been written about what I
have written has ever pleased me so much.

R. H. D.


In the spring of 1906 while Richard was on a visit to Providence, R.
I., Henry W. Savage produced a play by Jesse Lynch Williams and my
brother was asked to assist at rehearsals, a pastime in which he found
an enormous amount of pleasure.  The "McCloy" mentioned in the
following letter was the city editor of The Evening Sun when my brother
first joined the staff of that paper as a reporter.


NEW YORK, May 4, 1906.

DEAR NORA:

I left Providence Tuesday night and came on to New York yesterday.
Savage and Williams and all were very nice about the help they said I
had given them, and I had as much fun as though it had been a success I
had made myself, and I didn't have to make a speech, either.

Yesterday I spent in the newspaper offices gathering material from
their envelopes on Winston Churchill, M. P. who is to be one of my real
Soldiers of Fortune.  He will make a splendid one, in four wars, twice
made a question; before he was 21 years old, in Parliament, and a
leader in BOTH parties before he was 36.  In the newspaper offices they
had a lot of fun with me.  When I came into the city room of The Eve.
Sun, McCloy was at his desk in his shirt spiking copy.  He just raised
his eyes and went on with his blue pencil.  I said "There's nothing in
that story, sir, the man will get well, and the woman is his wife."

"Make two sticks of it," said McCloy, "and then go back to the
Jefferson police court."

When I sat down at my old desk, and began to write the copy boy came
and stood beside me and when I had finished the first page, snatched
it.  I had to explain I was only taking notes.

At The Journal, Sam Chamberlain who used to pay me $500 a story,
touched me on the shoulder as I was scribbling down notes, and said
"Hearst says to take you back at $17 a week." I said "I'm worth $18 and
I can't come for less." So he brought up the business manager and had a
long wrangle with him as to whether I should get $18.  The business
manager, a Jew gentleman, didn't know me from Adam, and seriously tried
to save the paper a dollar a week.  When the reporters and typewriter
girls began to laugh, he got very mad.  It was very funny how soothing
was the noise of the presses, and the bells and typewriters and men
yelling "Copy!" and "Damn the boy!" I could write better than if I had
been in the silence of the farm.  It was like being able to sleep as
soon as the screw starts.

DICK.




CHAPTER XVI

THE CONGO

During the winter of 1907 the world rang with the reports of the
atrocities in the Congo, and Robert J. Collier, of Collier's Weekly,
asked Richard to go to the Congo and make an investigation.  I do not
believe that my brother was ever in much sympathy with the commission,
as he did not feel that he could afford the time that a thorough
investigation demanded.  However, with his wife he sailed for Liverpool
on January 5, 1907, and three weeks later started for Africa.
Regarding this trip, in addition to the letters he wrote to his family,
I also quote from a diary which he had just started and which he
conscientiously continued until his death.


From diary of January 24th, 1907.  Last day in London.  Margaret Frazer
offered me gun from a Captain Jenkins of Nigeria.  Instead bought
Winchester repeating, hoping, if need it, get one coast.  Lunched
Savoy-Lynch, Mrs. Lynch, her sister--very beautiful girl.  In afternoon
Sam Sothern and Margaret came in to say "Good bye." Dined at Anthony
Hope's--Barrie and Mrs. Barrie and Jim Whigham.  Mrs. Barrie looking
very well, Barrie not so well.  As silent as ever, only talked once
during dinner when he told us about the first of his series of cricket
matches between authors and artists.  Did not have eleven authors, so
going along road picked up utter strangers one a soldier in front of
embracing two girls.  Said he would come if girls came too--all put in
brake.  Mrs. Barrie said the Llewellen Davis' were the originals for
the Darlings and their children in Peter Pan.  They played a strange
game of billiards suggested by Barrie who won as no one else knew the
rules and they claimed he invented them to suit his case.  Sat up until
three writing and packing.  The dinner was best have had this trip in
London.


Compagnie Belge Maritime Du Congo.

S. S.  February 11th, 1907.


To-morrow, we will be in Banana, which is the first port in the Congo.
When I remember how far away the Congo seemed from New York and London,
it is impossible to believe we are less than a day from it.  I am so
very glad I came.  The people who have lived here for years agree about
it in no one fact, so, it is a go-as-you-please for any one so far as
accurate information is concerned, and I am as likely to be right as
any one else.  It has been a pleasant trip and for us will not be over
until some days, for at Matadi, which is up the river, we will probably
live on the steamer as the shore does not sound attractive.  Then I
shall probably go on up the river and after a month or six weeks come
back again.  At Boma I am to see the Governor, one of the inspectors on
board is to introduce me, and I have an idea they will make me as
comfortable as possible, so that I may not see anything.  Not that I
would be likely to see anything hidden under a year.  Yesterday was the
crossing of the Equator.  The night before Neptune, one of the crew,
and his wife, the ship's butcher, and a kroo boy, as black as coal for
the heir apparent came over the side and proclaimed that those who
never before had crossed the Equator must be baptized.  We had crossed
but I was perfectly willing to go through it for the fun.  The Belgians
went at it as seriously as children, and worked up a grand succession
of events.  First we had gymkana races among the kroo boys.  The most
remarkable was their placing franc pieces in tubs of white and red
flour, for which the boys dived, they then dug for more money into a
big basket fitted with feathers and when they came out they were the
most awful sights imaginable.  You can picture their naked black bodies
and faces spotted with white and pink and stuck like chickens with
feathers.  Then the next day we were all hauled before a court and
judged, and having all been found guilty were condemned to be shaved
and bathed publicly at four.  Meantime the Italians, is it not the
picture of them, had organized a revolution against the Tribunal, with
the object of ducking them.  They went into this as though it were a
real conspiracy and had signs and passwords.  At four o'clock, in turn
they sat us on the edge of the great tank on the well deck and splashed
us over with paste and then tilted us in.  I tried to carry the
Frenchman who was acting as barber, with me but only got him half in.
But Milani, one of the Italians, swung him over his head plumb into the
water.  The Frenchman is a rich elephant hunter who is not very
popular.  When the revolution broke loose we all yelled "A bas le
Tribunal" "Vive la Revolution!" and there was awful rough house.  I
made for the Frenchman and went in with him and nearly drowned him, and
everybody was being thrown into the tank or held in front of a fire
cross.  After dinner there was a grand ceremony, the fourth, in which
certificates were presented by an Inspecteur d'Etat who is on board,
and is a Deputy Governor of a district.  Then there was much champagne
and a concert and Cecil and I sat with the Captain, the Bishop, in his
robes and berretta and the two inspectors and they were very charming
to both of us.

DICK.



Compagnie Belge Maritime Du Congo.

S. S.  February 13th, 1907.

DEAR MOTHER:

We reached Banana yesterday morning, and the mouth of the Congo, and as
the soldier said when he reached the top of San Juan Hill, "Hell! well
here we are!"  Banana looks like one of the dozen little islands in the
West Indies, where we would stop to take on some "brands of bananas,"
instead of the port to a country as big as Europe.  We went ashore and
wandered around under the palm trees, and took photos, and watched some
men fishing in the lagoons, and we saw a strange fish that leaps on the
top of the water just as a frog jumps on land.  It is certainly hot.
Milani and I went in swimming in the ocean, and got finely cool.  Then
we paddled the canoe back to the ship to show the blacks how good we
were, and got very hot, and the blacks charged us a franc for the
voyage.  To-morrow we will be in Boma, the capital, which is much of a
place with shops and a lawn tennis court.


BOMA, February 15th.

Boma is more or less laid out and contains the official residences of
the Government.  I walked all over it in an hour, and here you walk
very slow.  There are three or four big trading stores AND a tennis
court.  It is, however, a dreary place.  We called on the missionary
and his wife, but she does not speak English and their point of view of
everything was not cheerful or instructive.  Cecil plans to remain on
board while at Matadi and return with this same boat to Boma.  I want
her to go home in this boat or in some other, as I believe Boma most
unhealthy and I know it to be most uncomfortable.  She would have to go
to a hotel which is very hot and rough, although it is clean and well
run.  I am undecided whether to go up the river for ten days, to where
it crosses the equator, or to leave the upper Congo and go up the Kasai
river.  This is off the beaten track, and one may see something of
interest.  I will know better what I will do in an hour, when I get to
Matadi.


MATADI--Feby. 21.

We are now at Matadi.  The Captain invited us to stop on board and it
is well he did.  We dine on deck where the wind blows but the rest of
the ship is being cleaned and painted for the trip North.  Four hatches
are discharging cargo all at once, from four in the morning until
midnight.  Officers and kroo boys get four hours sleep out of the
twenty-four, but I sleep right through it, so does Cecil.  Sometimes
they take out iron rails and then zinc roofs and steel boats, 6000
cases of gin and 1000 tons of coal.  Still, it is much better than in
the Hotel Africa on shore.  Matadi is a hill of red iron and the heat
is grand.  Everything in this country is grand.  The river is, in
places, seven miles wide, the sunsets are like nothing earthly, and the
black people are like brooding shadows of lost souls, that is, if souls
have shadows.  Most of the blacks in this town are "prisoners" with a
steel ring around the neck, and chained in long lines.  I leave on the
23d to go up the Kasai River, because that is where the atrocities come
from and up there there are many missionaries.  I don't want you to
think I say this to "calm your fears," but I say it because it is as
true of this place as of every other one in the world, and that is,
that it is as easy to get about here as it is in Rhode Island.  It is
not half as dangerous as automobiling.  I have not even felt feverish,
neither has Cecil.  I never felt better.  Cecil stays on board and goes
back to Boma.  There she stops a week and then takes another ship back
to London.  She will not wait at Boma for me, at least, I hope not and
cannot imagine her doing so.  In any event, after I start, there will
be no way for us to communicate, and I will act on the understanding
that she has started North.

I have two very good boys and both speak English, and are from Sierra
Leone.  I take a two-day trip of 200 miles by rail, then four days by
boat up the Kasai and then I may come back by boat or walk.  It depends
on how I like it, how long I stay, for I can hope to see very little,
as under a year it would be impossible to write with authority of this
country.  But I'll see more of it than some at home, and I'll hear what
those who have lived here for years have to say.  It is awfully
interesting, absolutely different and more uncivilized than anything I
ever saw.  But all the time you are depressed with how little you know
and can know of it.  I will be here six weeks or two months and then
should get up the coast to London about the middle of May or sooner.

DICK.


From diary of February 22nd, 1907.

Spent about the worst night of my life.  No mattress, no pillow.  Not
space enough for my own cot.  Every insect in the world ate me.  After
a bath and coffee felt better.  It rained heavily until three P. M.
Read Pendennis, and loved it.  The picture of life at Clavering and
Fairoaks, and Dr. Portman and Foker are wonderful.  I do not know when
I have enjoyed and admired a work so much.  For some reason it is all
entirely new again.  I will read them all now in turn.  After rain
cleared took my slaves and went after "supplies."  Met a King.  I
thought he was a witch doctor, and the boys said he was a dancing man.
All his suite, wives and subjects followed, singing a song that made
your flesh creep.  At Hatton and Cookson's bought "plenty chop" for
"boys" who were much pleased.  Also a sparklet bottle, some whiskey and
two pints of champagne at 7 francs the pint.  Blush to own it was demi
Sec.  Also bacon, jam, milk, envelopes, a pillow.  Saw some ivory State
had seized and returned. 15 Kilo's.  Some taken from Gomez across
street not returned until he gave up half.  No reason given Taylor
agent H. & C. why returned Apparently when called will come down on the
ivory question.  Cuthbert Malet, coffee planter, came call on me.  Only
Englishman still in Service State.  Had much to say which did not want
printed until he out of country which will be in month or two.
Anstrossi has given me side of cabin where there is room for my cot, so
expect to sleep.


STANLEY POOL, Feb. 22nd, 1907.

DEAR MOTHER:

When you get this, I will be on my way to London.  The rest of my stay
here will be on board two boats, touching at the banks of the Kasai
river.  One I now am on takes me up and another takes me down.  I will
see a great deal that is strange and it is very interesting.
Yesterday, for example, only an hour before our train reached Gongolo
Station, there were three elephants that wandered across the track.  We
were very disappointed not to have seen them.  At the mission house on
the way up, I brought the first ice the mission boys had seen and when
I put a piece in the hand of one, he yelled and danced about as though
it were a coal.  The higher up you go the tougher it gets.  Back in the
jungle, one can only imagine what it is like.  Here all the white men
have black wives, and the way the whip is used on the men is very
different from the lower congo.  The boat is about as large as a
touring car, with all the machinery exposed.  I am very comfortable
though, with my bed and camp chair, and, books to read, when one gets
tired of this great, dirty river.  I, expect to see hippopotamuses and
many crocodiles and to learn something of the "atrocities" by hearsay.
To see for oneself, would take months.  I return from the Kasai
district by a boat like this one, burning wood and with a stern wheel,
reaching Leopoldville, this place, about the 12th of March, and sailing
on the Albertville for Southampton on the 19th of March.  So I should
be in London and so very near you by the 8th of April.  Of course, if I
take a later boat from here, I will be just that much later.  I am
perfectly well, never better.  No fever, no "tired feeling" good
appetite, in spite of awful tough food.  From this place money cannot
be used and I carry a bag of salt and rolls of cloth.  For a bottle of
salt you get a fowl or a turkey, for a tablespoonful an egg, or a bunch
of fruit.  When you write be sure and tell me ALL your plans for the
summer; that is, after you have been to see us.  My dearest love to you
all.

DICK.


From diary of February 27th, 1907.

Saw two hippos.  Thought Anstrossi said they were buffalo.  So was glad
when I found out what they were.  I did not want to go home without
having seen only two dead ones.  In a few minutes I saw two more.
Anstrossi fired at them but I did not, as thought it not the game when
one could not recover them.  Before noon saw six in a bunch--and then
what I thought was a spit of rock with a hippo lying on the end of it,
turned out to be fifteen hippos in a line!  Burnham has told he had
seen eleven in the Volta in one day.  Before one o'clock, I had seen
twenty-six, and, later in the day Anstrossi fired at another, and shot
a hole in the awning.  That made twenty-seven in one day.  Also some
monkeys.  The hippos were delightful.  They seemed so aristocratic,
like gouty old gentlemen, puffing and blowing and yawning, as though
everything bored them.


From diary of February 28th, 1907.

When just going up for coffee, saw what was so big, looking at it
against horizon, thought it must be an elephant.  Was a young hippo.
Captain Jensen brought boat within eighty yards of him, and both
Anstrossi and I fired, apparently knocking him off his legs, for he
rolled on his side as though his back was broken.  I missed him the
second shot, which struck the water just in front of him.  The other
three shots caught him in the head, in the mouth and ear.  He lay quite
still, and the boys rushed out a gang plank and surrounded him singing
and shouting and cutting his tail to make him bleed and weaken him.
They don't die for an hour but he seemed dead enough, so I went to my
cabin to re-load my gun and my camera.  In three minutes I came out,
and found the hippo still quiet.  Then he began to toss his head and I
shot him again, to put him out of pain.  In return for which he rolled
over into the water and got away.  I was mad.  Later saw four more.
Just at sunset while taking bath another was seen on shore.  We got
within sixty yards of him and all of us missed him or at least did not
hurt him.  He then trotted for the river with his head up and again I
must have missed, although at one place he was but fifty yards away,
when he entered the water, a hundred.  I stepped it off later in the
sand.  I followed him up and hit him or some one of us hit him and he
stood up on his hind legs.  But he put back to land for the third time.
Captain said wait until moon came out.  But though we hunted up to our
waists saw none.  One came quite close at dinner.  Seven on the day.


CONGO RIVER--March 1, 1907.

DEAR MOTHER:

I have been up the Congo as far as the Kasai river, and up that to a
place called Dima.  There I found myself in a sort of cul de sac.  I
found that the rubber plantations I had come to see, were nine days
journey distant.  In this land where time and distance are so
differently regarded than with us, a man tells you to go to Dima to see
rubber.  He means after getting to Dima, you must catch a steamer that
leaves every two weeks and travel for five days.  But he forgets that
that fact is important to visitors.  As he is under contract to stay
here three years, it does not much matter to him how he spends a month,
or so.  Dima was two hundred yards square, and then the jungle.  In
half an hour, I saw it all, and met every one in it.  They gave me a
grand reception, but I could not spend ten days in Dima.  The only
other thing I could do was to take a canoe to the Jesuit Mission where
the Fathers promised me shooting, or, try to catch the boat back to
England that stops at interesting ports.  Sooner than stop in Boma, I
urged Cecil to take that boat.  So, if I catch it, we will return
together.  It is a five weeks journey, and rather long to spend alone.
In any event my letters will go by a faster boat.  I have had a most
wonderfully interesting visit, at least, to me.  I hope I can make it
readable.  But, much of its pleasure was personal.

I have just had to stop writing this, for what when I get back to New
York will seem a perfectly good reason for interrupting a letter to
even you.  A large hippopotamus has just pushed past us with five baby
hippos in front of her.  She is shoving them up stream, and the papa
hippo is in the wake puffing and blowing.  They are very plenty here
and on the way up stream, I saw a great many, and every morning and
evening went hunting for them on shore.  I wanted the head of a
hippopotamus awfully keenly for the farm.  But of the only two I saw on
land, both got away from me.  I did not shoot at any I saw in the
water, although the other idiot on board did, because if you kill them,
you cannot recover them, and it seems most unsportsmanlike.  Besides, I
was so grateful to them for being so proud and pompous, and real
aristocrats dating back from the flood.  But I was terribly
disappointed at losing both of those I saw on land.  One I dropped at
the first shot, and the other I missed, as he was running, to get back
into the water.  The one I shot, and that everyone thought was dead,
AFTER THE "BOYS" BEGAN TO CUT HIM UP, decided he was not going to stand
for that, and to our helpless dismay suddenly rolled himself into the
water.  If that is not hard luck, I don't know it.  All I got was a bad
photograph of him, and I had already decided where I would hang his
head, and how much I would tip the crew for cutting him up.  It was a
really wonderful journey.  I loved every minute of it and never was I
in better health.

If I only could have known that you knew that I was all right, but
instead you were worrying.  The nights were bright moonlight, and the
days were beautiful; full of strange people and animals, birds and
views.  We three sat in the little bridge of the tinpot boat, and
smoked pipes and watched the great muddy river rushing between
wonderful banks.  There was the Danish Captain, an Italian officer and
the engineer was from Finland.  The Italian spoke French and the two
others English, and I acted as interpreter!!  Can you imagine it?  I am
now really a daring French linguist.  People who understand me, get
quick promotion.  If I only could have been able to tell you all was
well and not to be worried.  At Kwarmouth I have just received a wire
from Cecil saying she expects to leave by the slow boat but will stay
if I wish it.  So, now we can both go by the slow boat if I can catch
it.  I hope so.  must have found Boma as bad as it looked.  God bless
you all.

DICK.



On April 13, Richard was back in London and in his diary of that date
he writes, "Never so glad to get anywhere.  Went to sleep to the music
of motorcars.  Nothing ever made me feel so content and comfortable and
secure as their 'honk, honk.'"


From diary of April 22nd, 1907.

A blackmailer named H---- called, with photos of atrocities and letters
and films.  He wanted 30 Pounds for the lot.  I gave him 3 Pounds for
three photos.  One letter he showed me signed Bullinger, an Englishman,
said he had put the fear of God in their hearts by sticking up the
chief's head on a pole, and saying, "Now, make rubber, or you will look
like that." Went to lunch with Pearson but it was the wrong day, and so
missed getting a free feed.  Thinking he would turn up, I ordered a
most expensive lunch.  I paid for it.  Evening went Patience, which
liked immensely and then Duchess of Sutherland's party to Premiers.
Saw Churchill and each explained his share of the Real Soldiers row.


From diary of April 28th, 1907.

We went down by train to Cliveden going by Taplow to Maidenhead where
Astor had sent his car to meet us.  It is a wonderful place and the
view of the Thames is a beautiful one.  They had been making
alterations, bathrooms, and putting white enamel tiles throughout the
dungeons.  If Dukes lived no more comfortably than those who owned
Cliveden, I am glad I was not a Duke.  What was most amusing was the
servant's room which was quite as smart as any library or study, with
fine paintings, arm chairs and writing material.  Nannie and Astor were
exceedingly friendly and we walked all over the place.  It was good to
get one's feet on turf again.  They sent us back by motor, so we
arrived most comfortably.  I gave a dinner to the Hopes, Wyndham, Miss
Mary Moore, Ashmead-Bartlett and Margaret.  Websters could not come.
Later, came on here, and had a chat, the Websters coming too.  I read
Thaw trial.


Early in May Richard and his wife returned to Mount Kisco and my
brother at once started in to change his farce "The Galloper" into a
musical comedy.  It was produced on August 12, at the Astor Theatre,
under the title of the "Yankee Tourist," with Raymond Hitchcock as the
star.  The following I quote from Richard's diary of that date:


Monday, August 12th, 1907.

Was to have lunched with Ned Stone but he was in court.  Met Whigham in
street.  Impulsively asked him to lunch.  Ethel and Jack turned up at
Martin's; asked them to lunch.  Ethel and I drove around town doing
errands, mine being the purchase of tickets for numerous friends.
Called on Miss Trusdale to inquire about Harden-Hickey.  She wants her
to go to the country.  Cecil arrived at six.  We had a suite of
eighty-nine rooms.  We dined at Sherry's with Ethel and Jack, Ethel
being host.  Taft was there.  Hottest night ever.  I sat with Jack.  In
spite of weather, play went well.  Bonsals, Ethel, Arthur Brisbane were
in Cecil's box.  Booth Tarkington in Irwin's.  Surprise of performance
was "Hello, Bill" which Raymond had learned only that morning.  Helen
Hale helped him greatly with dance.  People came to supper at Waldorf,
and things went all wrong.  Next time I have a first Night I want no
friends during or after.  Missed the executive ability of Charles
Belmont greatly.




CHAPTER XVII

A LONDON WINTER

From the fall of 1907 to that of 1908 Richard divided his time between
Mount Kisco, Marion, and Cuba.  In December of 1908 he sailed for
London where he took Turner the artist's old house in Chelsea for the
winter.


Cheyne Walk, Chelsea.

December 25.  Christmas Day.

DEAR MOTHER:

We are settled here in Darkest Chelsea as though we had been born here.
I am thinking of putting in my time of exile by running for Mayor.
Meanwhile, it is a wonderful place in which to write the last chapters
of "Once Upon a Time."  The house is quite wonderful.  In Spring and
Summer it must be rarely beautiful.  It has trees in front and a yard
and a garden and a squash court: a sort of tennis you play against the
angles of walls covered smooth with cement.  Also a studio as large as
a theatre.  Outside the trees beat on the windows and birds chirp
there.  The river flows only forty feet away, with great brown barges
on it, and gulls whimper and cry, and aeroplane all day.  I have a fine
room, and about the only one you can keep as warm as toast SHOULD be,
and in England never is.

Cecil has engaged a teacher, and a model and he is coming here to work.
He is twenty years old, and called the "boy Sargent."  So, as soon as
the British public gets sober, we will begin life in earnest, and both
work hard.  I need not tell you how glad I am to be at it.  I was with
you all in heart last night and recited as much as I could remember of
"Twas the Night Before Christmas," which always means Dad to me, as he
used to read it to us.  How much he made the day mean to us.  I wish I
could just slip in for a kiss, and a hug.  But tonight we will all
drink to you, and a few hours later you will drink to us.  God bless
you all.

DICK.


December 29th.

DEAR MOTHER:

A blizzard has swept over London.  The last one cost the City
Corporation  $25,000!!  The last man who contracted to clean New York
of snow was cleaned out by two days of it, to the tune of  $200,000.
Still, in spite of our alleged superiority in all things, one inch of
snow in Chelsea can do more to drive one to drink and suicide than a
foot of it "on the farm."  At the farm we threw a ton of coal against
it, and lit log fires and oil lamps, and were warm.  Here, they try to
fight it with two buckets of soft chocolate cake called Welch coal, and
the result is you freeze.  Cecil's studio is like one vast summer hotel
at Portland Maine in January.  You cannot go near it except in rubber
boots, fur coats and woolen gloves.  My room still is the only one that
is livable.  It is four feet square, heavily panelled in oak and the
coal fire makes it as warm as a stoke hole.  So, I am all right and can
work nicely.  Janet Sothern came to lunch today and Cecil and she in
furs went picture gazing.  Tomorrow we have Capt. Chule to dinner.  He
came up the West coast with us and is accustomed to a temperature of
120 degrees.

New Year's eve we spend with Lady Lewis where we dine and keep it up
until four in the morning.  We will easily be able to get back here but
how we can get a hansom from here to the great city, I can't imagine.
I have seen none in five days.  It is fine to be surrounded by busts of
Carlyle, Whistler, Rosetti and Turner's own, but occasionally you wish
for a taxicab.  Tomorrow I am going on a spree to the great city of
London.  The novel goes on smoothly, and all is well.  I am still
running for Mayor of Chelsea.

Love to you all.

DICK.


LONDON--January 1, 1909.

DEAR MOTHER:

I drank your health and Noll's and Charley's last night and so we all
came into the New Year together.  I hope it will be as good for me as
the last.  Certainly Chas. is coming on well with another book.  It is
splendid.  I am so very, very glad.  Some of the very best stories
anybody has written will be in his next book.

We dined at the Lewis's.  There were 150 at dinner and as we live in
Chelsea now--one might as well be in Brooklyn--we were a half hour
late.  Fancy feeling you were keeping 150 people hungry.  I sat at Lady
Lewis's table with some interesting men and one beautiful woman all
dressed in glass over pink silk, and pearls, and pearls and then,
pearls.  She said "Who am I" and I said "You look like a girl in
America, who used to stand under a green paper lamp shade up in a farm
house in New Hampshire and play a violin."  Whereat there was much
applause, because it seemed she was that girl, the daughter of a Mrs.
Van S----, who wrote short stories.  Her daughter was L---- Van S----
now the wife of a baronet and worth five million dollars.  The board we
paid then was eight dollars a week.  Now, we are dining with her next
Monday and as I insisted on gold plate she said "Very well, I'll get
out the gold plate."  But wasn't it dramatic of me to remember her
after twenty two years?

DICK.


LONDON-February 23, 1909.

DEAR MOTHER:

George Washington's health was celebrated by drinking it at dinner.  I
had been asked to speak at a banquet but for some strange reason could
not see myself in the part.  The great Frohman arrived last night and
we are all agitated until he speaks.  If he would only like my plays as
some of the actors do, I would be passing rich.  Barrie asked himself
to lunch yesterday and was very entertaining.  He told us of a letter
he received from Guy DuMaurier who wrote "An Englishman's Home" which
has made a sensation second to nothing in ten years.  He is an officer
stationed at a small post in South Africa.  He wrote Barrie he was at
home, very blue and homesick, and outside it was raining.  Then came
Barrie's long cable, at 75 cents a word, saying his play was the
success of the year.  He did not know even it had been ACCEPTED.  He
shouted to his wife, and they tried to dance but the hut was too small,
so they ran out into the compound and danced in the rain.  Then he sent
the Kaffir boys to the mess to bring all the officers and all the
champagne and they did not go to bed at all.  The next day cables,
still at three shillings a word came from papers and magazines and
publishers, managers, syndicates.  And, in his letter he says, still
not appreciating what a fuss it has made, "I suppose all it needs now
is to be made a question in the House," when already it has been the
text of half a dozen speeches by Cabinet Ministers, and three companies
are playing it in the provinces.  What fun to have a success come in
such a way, not even to know it was being rehearsed.  Today Sargent is
here to see what is wrong with Cecil's picture of Janet.  He came early
and said he couldn't tell until he saw Janet, so now he is back again,
and both Janet and Cecil are shaking with excitement.  He is the most
simple, kindly genius I ever met.  He says the head is very fine and I
guess Cecil suspected that, before she called him in.  He says she must
send it to the Royal Academy.  I am now going out to hear more words
fall from the great man, and so farewell.  Seymour and I began work
yesterday on the Dictator.  It went very smooth. All my love to Noll
and to you.

DICK.


Read the other letter first and then, let me tell you that when I went
out to see Sargent, I found Cecil complaining that she could not
understand just how it was he wanted Janet to pose.  Whereat she handed
him a piece of chalk and he made a sketch of Janet as exquisite as the
morning and rubbed his hands of the charcoal and left it there!  It's
only worth a hundred pounds!  Can you imagine the nerve of Cecil.  I
was so shocked I could only gasp.  But, he was quite charming and
begged her to call him next time she got in a scrape, and gave her his
private telephone number.

Fancy having Sargent waiting to be called up to make sketches for you.
I left Janet and Cecil giggling with happiness.  Janet because she had
been sketched by him and Cecil because she has the sketch.  It's a
three fourths length three feet high, and he did it in ten minutes.  I
am now going to ask her to invite the chef of the Ritz in, to give us a
sketch of cooking a dinner.

DICK.




CHAPTER XVIII

MILITARY MANOEUVRES

In August, 1909, Richard and his wife left Mount Kisco for a visit to
Mr. and Mrs. Clark at Marion.  While there my brother attended and
later on wrote an article on the war manoeuvres held at Middleboro,
Massachusetts.


MARION, MASSACHUSETTS.

August 16th, 1909.

DEAR MOTHER:

We had a splendid day to day.  I arranged to have Cecil meet me at
eleven at Headquarters in the woods below Middleboro, and I spent the
morning locating different regiments.  Then, after I "met up" with her,
I took her in my car.  Both she and Hiller were awfully keen over it,
so, we got on splendidly.  And, of course, Hiller's knowledge of the
country was wonderfully convenient.  We had great luck in seeing the
only fight of the day, the first one of the war.  Indeed, I think we
caused it.  There was a troop of cavalry with a Captain who was afraid
to advance.  I chided him into doing something, the umpire having
confided to me, he would mark him, if he did not.  But, he did it
wrong.  Anyway, he charged a barn with 36 troopers and lost every
fourth man.  In real warfare he would have lost all his men and all his
horses.  Cecil and Hiller pursued in the car at the very heels of the
cavalry, and I ran ahead with the bicycle scouts.  It was most
exciting.  I am going out again to-morrow.  Lots of Love to you all.

DICK.


MARION, MASSACHUSETTS.

August 19th, 1909.

DEAR MOTHER:

I got in last night too late to write and I am sorry.  To-day, the war
came to an end with our army, the Red one, with the road to Boston open
before it.  Indeed, when the end came, they were fighting with their
backs to that City, and could have entered it to-night.  I begged both
Bliss and Wood to send in the cavalry just for the moral effect, but
they were afraid of the feeling, that was quite strong.  I had much
fun, never more, and saw all that was worth seeing.  I was glad to see
I am in such good shape physically, but with the tramping I do over the
farm, it is no wonder.  I could take all the stone walls at a jump,
while the others were tearing them down.  I also met hundreds of men I
knew and every one was most friendly, especially the correspondents.
Just as I liked to be on a story with a "star" man when I was a
reporter, they liked having a real "war" correspondent, take it
seriously.  They were always wanting to know if it were like the Real
Thing, and as I assured them it was, they were satisfied.  Some
incidents were very funny.  I met a troop of cavalry this morning,
riding away from the battle, down a crossroad, and thinking it was a
flanking manoeuvre, started to follow them with the car.  "Where are
you going?" I asked the Captain.  "Nowhere," he said, "We are dead."
An Umpire was charging in advance of two troops of the 10th down a
state road, when one trooper of the enemy who were flying, turned back
and alone charged the two troops.  "You idiot"! yelled the Umpire,
"don't you know you and your horse are shot to pieces?" "Sure, I know
it," yelled the trooper "but, this ---- horse don't know it."

RICHARD.


Early in the fall of 1909 Richard returned from Marion to New York and
went to Crossroads, where for the next three years he remained a
greater part of the time.  They were years of great and serious changes
for him.  An estrangement of long standing between him and his wife had
ended in their separation early in 1910, to be followed later by their
divorce.  In September of that year my mother died while on a visit to
Crossroads.

After my father's death life to her became only a period of waiting
until the moment came when she would rejoin him--because her faith was
implicit and infinite.  She could not well set about preparing herself
because all of her life she had done that and, so, smiling and with a
splendid bravery and patience she lived on, finding her happiness in
bringing cheer and hope and happiness to all who came into the presence
of her wonderful personality.  The old home in Philadelphia was just
the same as it had been through her long married life--that is with one
great difference, but on account of this difference I knew that she was
glad to spend her last days with Richard at Crossroads.  And surely
nothing that could be done for a mother by a son had been left undone
by him.  Through these last long summer days she sat on the terrace
surrounded by the flowers and the sunshine that she so loved.  Little
children came to play at her knee, and old friends travelled from afar
to pay her court.

In the winter of 1910-11 my brother visited Aiken, where he spent
several months.  The following June he went to London at the time of
King George's coronation, but did not write about it.  Again, in
November, 1911, he visited my sister in London, but returned to New
York in January, 1912, and spent a part of the winter in Aiken and
Cuba.  At Aiken he found at least peace and the devotion of loving
friends that he so craved, but in London and Cuba, which once had meant
so much to him, he seemed to have lost interest entirely.  But not once
during these years did he cease working, and working hard.  On almost
every page of his diary at this period I find such expressions as
"wrote 500 words for discipline."  And again "Satisfaction in work of
last years when writing for existence, has been up to any I ever wrote."

And in spite of all of the trouble of these days, he not only wrote
incessantly but did some of his very finest work.  Personally I have
never seen a man make a more courageous fight.  To quote again from his
diary of this time:  "Early going to my room saw red sunrise and gold
moon.  I seemed to stop worrying about money.  With such free pleasures
I found I could not worry.  Every day God gives me greater delight in
good things, in beauty, and in every simple exercise and amusement."

Twice during these difficult days he went to visit Gouverneur Morris
and his wife at Aiken, and after Richard's death his old friend wrote
of the first of these visits:

"It was in our little house at Aiken, in South Carolina, that he was
with us most and we learned to know him best, and that he and I became
dependent upon each other in many ways.  "Events, into which I shall
not go, had made his life very difficult and complicated.  And he who
had given so much friendship to so many people needed a little
friendship in return, and perhaps, too, he needed for a time to live in
a house whose master and mistress loved each other, and where there
were children.  Before he came that first year our house had no name.
Now it is called 'Let's Pretend.'

"Now the chimney in the living-room draws, but in those first days of
the built-over house it didn't.  At least, it didn't draw all the time,
but we pretended that it did, and with much pretense came faith.  From
the fireplace that smoked to the serious things of life we extended our
pretendings, until real troubles went down before them--down and out.

"It was one of Aiken's very best winters, and the earliest spring I
ever lived anywhere.  R. H. D. came shortly after Christmas.  The
spiraeas were in bloom, and the monthly roses; you could always find a
sweet violet or two somewhere in the yard; here and there splotches of
deep pink against gray cabin walls proved that precocious peach-trees
were in bloom.  It never rained.  At night it was cold enough for
fires.  In the middle of the day it was hot.  The wind never blew, and
every morning we had a four for tennis and every afternoon we rode in
the woods.  And every night we sat in front of the fire (that didn't
smoke because of pretending) and talked until the next morning.

"He was one of those rarely gifted men who find their chiefest pleasure
not in looking backward or forward, but in what is going on at the
moment.  Weeks did not have to pass before it was forced upon his
knowledge that Tuesday, the fourteenth (let us say), had been a good
Tuesday.  He knew it the moment he waked at 7 A. M., and perceived the
Tuesday sunshine making patterns of bright light upon the floor.  The
sunshine rejoiced him and the knowledge that even before breakfast
there was vouchsafed to him a whole hour of life.  That day began with
attentions to his physical well-being.  There were exercises conducted
with great vigor and rejoicing, followed by a tub, artesian cold, and a
loud and joyous singing of ballads.

"The singing over, silence reigned.  But if you had listened at his
door you must have heard a pen going, swiftly and boldly.  He was hard
at work, doing unto others what others had done unto him.  You were a
stranger to him; some magazine had accepted a story that you had
written and published it.  R. H. D. had found something to like and
admire in that story (very little perhaps), and it was his duty and
pleasure to tell you so.  If he had liked the story very much he would
send you instead of a note a telegram.  Or it might be that you had
drawn a picture, or, as a cub reporter, had shown golden promise in a
half column of unsigned print, R. H. D.  would find you out, and find
time to praise you and help you.  So it was that when he emerged from
his room at sharp eight o'clock, he was wide-awake and happy and
hungry, and whistled and double-shuffled with his feet, out of
excessive energy, and carried in his hands a whole sheaf of notes and
letters and telegrams.

"Breakfast with him was not the usual American breakfast, a sullen,
dyspeptic gathering of persons who only the night before had rejoiced
in each other's society.  With him it was the time when the mind is, or
ought to be, at its best, the body at its freshest and hungriest.
Discussions of the latest plays and novels, the doings and undoings of
statesmen, laughter and sentiment--to him, at breakfast, these things
were as important as sausages and thick cream.

"Breakfast over, there was no dawdling and putting off of the day's
work (else how, at eleven sharp, could tennis be played with a free
conscience?).  Loving, as he did, everything connected with a
newspaper, he would now pass by those on the hall-table with never so
much as a wistful glance, and hurry to his workroom.

"He wrote sitting down.  He wrote standing up.  And, almost you may
say, he wrote walking up and down.  Some people, accustomed to the
delicious ease and clarity of his style, imagine that he wrote very
easily.  He did and he didn't.  Letters, easy, clear, to the point, and
gorgeously human, flowed from him without let or hindrance.  That
masterpiece of corresponding, the German March through Brussels, was
probably written almost as fast as he could talk (next to Phillips
Brooks, he was the fastest talker I ever heard), but when it came to
fiction he had no facility at all.  Perhaps I should say that he held
in contempt any facility that he may have had.  It was owing to his
incomparable energy and Joblike patience that he ever gave us any
fiction at all.  Every phrase in his fiction was, of all the myriad
phrases he could think of, the fittest in his relentless judgment to
survive.  Phrases, paragraphs, pages, whole stories even, were written
over and over again.  He worked upon a principle of elimination.  If he
wished to describe an automobile turning in at a gate, he made first a
long and elaborate description from which there was omitted no detail,
which the most observant pair of eyes in Christendom had ever noted
with reference to just such a turning.  Thereupon he would begin a
process of omitting one by one those details which he had been at such
pains to recall; and after each omission he would ask himself, 'Does
the picture remain?'  If it did not, he restored the detail which he
had just omitted, and experimented with the sacrifice of some other,
and so on, and so on, until after Herculean labor there remained for
the reader one of those swiftly flashed ice-clear pictures (complete in
every detail) with which his tales and romances are so delightfully and
continuously adorned.

"But it is quarter to eleven, and this being a time of holiday, R. H.
D. emerges from his workroom happy to think that he has placed one
hundred and seven words between himself and the wolf who hangs about
every writer's door.  He isn't satisfied with those hundred and seven
words.  He never was in the least satisfied with anything that he
wrote, but he has searched his mind and his conscience and he believes
that under the circumstances they are the very best that he can do.
Anyway, they can stand in their present order until--after lunch.

"A sign of his youth was the fact that to the day of his death he had
denied himself the luxury and slothfulness of habits.  I have never
seen him smoke automatically as most men do.  He had too much respect
for his own powers of enjoyment and for the sensibilities, perhaps, of
the best Havana tobacco.  At a time of his own deliberate choosing,
often after many hours of hankering and renunciation, he smoked his
cigar.  He smoked it with delight, with a sense of being rewarded, and
he used all the smoke there was in it.

"He dearly loved the best food, the best champagne, and the best Scotch
whiskey.  But these things were friends to him, and not enemies.  He
had toward food and drink the continental attitude; namely, that
quality is far more important than quantity; and he got his
exhilaration from the fact that he was drinking champagne and not from
the champagne.  Perhaps I shall do well to say that on questions of
right and wrong he had a will of iron.  All his life he moved
resolutely in whichever direction his conscience pointed; and although
that ever present and never obtrusive conscience of his made mistakes
of judgment now and then, as must all consciences, I think it can never
once have tricked him into any action that was impure or unclean.  Some
critics maintain that the heroes and heroines of his books are
impossibly pure and innocent young people.  R. H. D. never called upon
his characters for any trait of virtue, or renunciation, or
self-mastery of which his own life could not furnish examples."

In June of 1912 Richard reported the Republican convention at Chicago.
Shortly after this, on July 8, he married at Greenwich, Connecticut,
Miss Elizabeth Genevieve McEvoy, known on the stage as Bessie McCoy,
with whom he had first become acquainted in 1908 after the estrangement
from his wife.

Richard and his wife made their home at Crossroads, where he devoted
most of his working hours to the writing of short stories.  In August
of that year my brother, accompanied by his wife, returned to Chicago
to report the Progressive convention.  During the year 1913 he wrote
and produced the farce "Who's Who," of which William Collier was the
star, and in the fall of the same year spent a month in Cuba, with
Augustus Thomas, where they produced a film version of "Soldiers of
Fortune." In referring to this trip, Thomas wrote at the time of
Richard's death:

"In 1914 a motion-picture company arranged to make a feature film of
the play, and Dick and I went with their outfit to Santiago de Cuba,
where, twenty years earlier, he had found the inspiration for his story
and out of which city and its environs he had fashioned his
supposititious republic of Olancho.  On that trip he was the idol of
the company.  With the men in the smoking-room of the steamer there
were the numberless playful stories, in the rough, of the experiences
on all five continents and seven seas that were the backgrounds of his
published tales.

"At Santiago, if an official was to be persuaded to consent to some
unprecedented seizure of the streets, or a diplomat invoked for the
assistance of the Army or the Navy, it was the experience and good
judgment of Dick Davis that controlled the task.  In the field there
were his helpful suggestions of work and make up to the actors, and on
the boat and train and in hotel and camp the lady members met in him an
easy courtesy and understanding at once fraternal and impersonal.

"The element that he could not put into the account and which is
particularly pertinent to this page, is the author of 'Soldiers of
Fortune' as he revealed himself to me both with intention and
unconsciously in the presence of the familiar scenes.

"For three weeks, with the exception of one or two occasions when some
local dignitary captured the revisiting lion, he and I spent our
evenings together at a cafe table overlooking 'The Great Square,' which
he sketches so deftly in its atmosphere when Clay and the Langhams and
Stuart dine there.  At one end of the plaza the President's band was
playing native waltzes that came throbbing through the trees and
beating softly above the rustling skirts and clinking spurs of the
senoritas and officers sweeping by in two opposite circles around the
edges of the tessellated pavements.  Above the palms around the square
arose the dim, white facade of the Cathedral, with the bronze statue of
Anduella the liberator of Olancho, who answered with his upraised arm
and cocked hat the cheers of an imaginary populace.

"Twenty years had gone by since Dick had received the impression that
wrote those lines, and now sometimes after dinner half a long cigar
would burn out as he mused over the picture and the dreams that had
gone between.  From one long silence he said:  'I think I'll come back
here this winter and bring Mrs. Davis with me--stay a couple of
months.'  What a fine compliment to a wife to have the thought of her
and that plan emerge from that deep and romantic background.

"The picture people began their film with a showing of the 'mountains
which jutted out into the ocean and suggested roughly the five knuckles
of a giant's hand clenched and lying flat upon the surface of the
water.'  That formation of the sea wall is just outside of Santiago.
'The waves tunnelled their way easily enough until they ran up against
those five mountains and then they had to fall back.' How natural for
one of us to be unimpressed by such a feature of the landscape and yet
how characteristic of Dick Davis to see the elemental fight that it
recorded and get the hint for the whole of the engineering struggle
that is so much of his book.

"We went over those mountains together, where two decades before he had
planted his banner of romance.  We visited the mines and the railroads
and everywhere found some superintendent or foreman or engineer who
remembered Davis.  He had guessed at nothing.  Everywhere he had
overlaid the facts with adventure and with beauty, but he had been on
sure footing all the time.  His prototype of MacWilliams was dead.
Together we visited the wooden cross with which the miners had marked
his grave.




CHAPTER XIX

VERA CRUZ AND THE GREAT WAR

Late in April, 1914, when war between the United States and Mexico
seemed inevitable Richard once more left the peace and content of
Crossroads and started for Vera Cruz, arriving there on April 29.  He
had arranged to act as correspondent for a syndicate of newspapers, and
as he had for long been opposed to the administration's policy of
"watchful waiting" was greatly disappointed on his arrival at the
border to learn of the President's plan of mediation.  He wrote to his
wife:


CRUZ, April 24, 1914.

DEAREST ONE:

We left today at 5.30.  It was a splendid scene, except for the
children crying, and the wives of the officers and enlisted men trying
not to cry.  I got a stateroom to myself.  With the electric fan on and
the airport open, it is about as cool as a blast furnace.  But I was
given a seat on the left of General Funston, who is commanding this
brigade, and the other officers at the table are all good fellows.  As
long as I was going, I certainly had luck in getting away as sharply as
I did.  One day's delay would have made me miss this transport, which
will be the first to land troops.


April 25th.

A dreadnaught joined us today, the Louisiana.  I wirelessed the Admiral
asking permission to send a press despatch via his battleship, and he
was polite in reply, but firm.  He said "No." There are four transports
and three torpedo boats and the battleship.  We go very slowly, because
we must keep up with one of the troop ships with broken engines.  At
night it is very pretty seeing the ships in line, and the torpedo boats
winking their signals at each other.  I am writing all the time or
reading up things about the army I forget and getting the new dope.
Also I am brushing up my Spanish.  Jack London is on board, and three
other correspondents, two of whom I have met on other trips, and one
"cub" correspondent.  He was sitting beside London and me busily
turning out copy, and I asked him what he found to write about.  He
said, "Well, maybe I see things you fellows don't see."  What he meant
was that what was old to us was new to him, but he got guyed
unmercifully.


April 27, 1914.

The censor reads all I write, and so do some half-dozen Mexican cable
clerks and 60 (sixty) correspondents.  So when I cable "love," it MEANS
devotion, adoration, and worship; loyalty, fidelity and truth, wanting
you, needing you, unhappy for you.  It means ALL that.

RICHARD.


VERA CRUZ, April 30, 1914.

This heat--humid and moist--would sweat water out of a chilled steel
safe; so imagine what it does to me with all the awful winter's
accumulation of fat.  I hate to say it, but I LIKE these Mexicans--much
better than Cubans, or Central Americans.  They are human, kindly; it
is only the politicians and bandits like Villa who give them a bad
name.  But, though they ought to hate us, whenever I stop to ask my way
they invite me to come in and have "coffee" and say, "My house is
yours, senor," which certainly is kind after people have taken your
town away from you and given you another flag and knocked your head off
if you did not salute it.  I now have a fine room.  The Navy moved out
today and I got the room of the paymaster.  It faces the plaza and the
cathedral.  I burned a candle there today for our soon meeting.  The
priests all had run away, so I had to hunt up the candle, and pay the
money into the box marked for that purpose, but the Lord does not run
away, and He will see we soon meet.


May 2nd.

Yesterday I went out on the train that brings in refugees and saw the
Mexicans.  They had on three thousand cartridges, much hair, hats as
high as church steeples, and lots of dirt.  The Selig Moving Picture
folks took many pictures of us and several "stills," in which the war
correspondent was shown giving cigarettes to the brigands.  Also, I had
a wonderful bath in the ocean off the aviation camp.  I borrowed a suit
from one of the aviators, and splashed and swam around for an hour.
My! it was good.  It reminded me of my dear Bessie, because the last
time I was in the ocean was with her.

Maybe you know what is going on, but we do not.  So I just hustle
around all day trying to find news as I did when I was a reporter.  It
is hot enough here even for me, and I have lost about eight pounds of
that fat I laid in during our North Pole winter!


VERA CRUZ--May 8, 1914.

DEAR CHAS.:

Today, when Wilson ordered Huerta not to blockade Tampico which was an
insult to Mediators and the act of a bully and a coward, AND a
declaration of war, we all got on our ponies to "advance."  Then came
word Huerta would not blockade.  It is like living in a mad house.  We
all are hoping mediators refuse to continue negotiations.  If they have
self respect that is what they will do.  Tonight if Wilson and Huerta
ran for President, Huerta would get all our votes.  He may be an
uneducated Indian, but at least he is a man.  However, that makes no
never mind so far as to my getting back.  The reason I cannot return is
because I have "credentials."  It is not that they want ME here, but
they want my credentials here.  The administration is using, as I see
it, the privilege of having a correspondent at the front as a club.  It
says until war is declared it won't issue any more.  So those
syndicates who have no correspondent and the papers forming them, are
afraid to attack or to criticise the administration for fear they will
be blacklisted.  And those who have a correspondent with his three
thousand dollar signed and sealed pass in his pocket aren't taking any
chance on losing him.  So, I see before me an endless existence in Vera
Cruz.

RICHARD.


On May 7 Richard started for Mexico City where, if possible, he
intended to interview Huerta.  At Pasco de Macho he was arrested, but
afterward was allowed to proceed to Mexico City.  Here he was again
arrested, and without being allowed to interview Huerta was sent back
the day after his arrival to Vera Cruz.

Of this Vera Cruz experience John N. Wheeler, a friend of Richard's and
the manager of the syndicate which sent him to Mexico, wrote the
following after my brother's death:

"Richard Harding Davis went to Vera Cruz for a newspaper syndicate, and
after the first sharp engagement in the Mexican seaport there was
nothing for the correspondent to do but kill time on that barren, low
lying strip of Gulf coast, hemmed in on all sides by Mexicans and the
sea, and time is hard to kill there.  Yet there was a story to be got,
but it required nerve to go after it.

"In Mexico City was Gen. Huerta, the dictator of Mexico.  If a
newspaper could get an interview with him it would be a 'scoop,' but
the work was inclined to be dangerous for the interviewer, since
Americans were being murdered rather profusely in Mexico at the time in
spite of the astute assurances of Mr. Bryan, and no matter how
substantial his references the correspondent was likely to meet some
temperamental and touchy soldier with a loaded rifle who would shoot
first and afterward carry his papers to some one who could read them.

"One of the newspapers taking the stories by Mr. Davis from the
syndicate had a staff man at Vera Cruz as well, and thought to 'scoop'
the country by sending this representative to see Huerta, in this way
'beating' even the other subscribers to the Davis service.  An
interview in Mexico City was consequently arranged and the staff man
was cabled and asked to make the trip.  He promptly cabled his refusal,
this young man preferring to take no such chances.  It was then
suggested that Mr. Davis should attempt it.  By pulling some wires at
Washington it was arranged, through the Brazilian and English
Ambassadors at the Mexican capital, for Mr. Davis to interview
President Huerta, with safe conduct (this being about as safe as
nonskid tires) to Mexico City.  Mr. Davis was asked if he would make
the trip.  In less than two hours back came this laconic cable:

"'Leaving Mexico City to-morrow afternoon at 3 o'clock.'

"That was Richard Harding Davis--no hesitancy, no vacillation.  He was
always willing to go, to take any chance, to endure discomfort and all
if he had a fighting opportunity to get the news.  The public now knows
that Davis was arrested on this trip, that Huerta refused to make good
on the interview, and that it was only through the good efforts of the
British Ambassador at the Mexican capital he was released.  But Davis
went.

"There was an echo of this journey to the Mexican capital several
months later after the conflict in Europe had been raging for a few
weeks.  Lord Kitchener announced at one stage of the proceedings he
would permit a single correspondent, selected and indorsed by the
United States Government, to accompany the British army to the front.
Of course, all the swarm of American correspondents in London at the
time were eager for the desirable indorsement.  Mr. Davis cabled back
the conditions of his acceptance.  Immediately Secretary of State Bryan
was called in Washington on the long-distance telephone.

"'Lord Kitchener has announced,' the Secretary of State was told, 'that
he will accept one correspondent with the British troops in the field,
if he is indorsed by the United States Government.  Richard Harding
Davis, who is in London, represents a string of the strongest
newspapers in the United States for this syndicate, and we desire the
indorsement of the State Department so he can obtain this appointment.'

"'Mr. Davis made us some trouble when he was in Mexico,' answered Mr.
Bryan.  'He proceeded to the Mexican capital without our consent and I
will have to consider the matter very carefully before indorsing him.
His Mexican escapade caused us some diplomatic efforts and
embarrassment.'  (What the Secretary of State did to bring about Mr.
Davis's release on the occasion of his Mexican arrest is still a secret
of the Department.)

"Mr. Bryan did not indorse Mr. Davis finally, which was well, since
Lord Kitchener of Khartum kept the selected list of correspondents
loafing around London on one pretext or another so long they all became
disgusted and went without an official pass from 'K. of K.'  As soon as
Mr. Davis was told he would not be appointed he proceeded to Belgium
and returned some of the most thrilling stories written on this
conflict at great personal risk."


May 13, 1914.

MY DEAREST ONE:

DO NOT BLAME me for this long delay in writing.  God knows I wanted
every day to "talk" to you.  But we were on the "suspect" list, and to
make even a note was risky.  The way I did it was to exclaim over the
beauty of some flower or tree, and then ask the Mexican nearest me to
write the name of it HIMSELF in MY notebook.  Then I would say, "In
English that would be----" and I would pretend to write beside it the
English equivalent, but really would write the word that was the key to
what I wished to remember.  So, you see, a letter at that rate of
progress was impossible.  It was a case of "Can't get away to cable you
today; police won't let me!"  However, we are all safe at home again.
As a matter of fact, I had a most exciting time, and am dying to tell
you the "insie" story.  But the one I sent the papers must serve.  I
promised myself I would give the FIRST soldier, marine and sailor I met
on returning a cigar, and the first sailor was the CHAPLAIN OF THE
FLEET, Father Reany.  But he took the cigar and gave me his blessing.
I am now burning candles to St. Rita.  What worried me the MOST was how
worried YOU would be; and I begged Palmer not to send the story of our
first arrest.  But other people told of it, and he had to forward it.
You certainly made the wires BURN! and had the army guessing.  One
officer said to me, "I'm awfully sorry to see you back.  If you'd only
have stayed in jail another day your wife would have had us all on our
way to Mexico."  And the censor said, "My God! I'm glad you're safe!
Your wife has MADE OUR LIVES HELL!"  And quite right, too, bless you!
None of us knows anything, but it looks to me that NOTHING will induce
Wilson to go to war.  But the Mexicans think we ARE at war, and act
accordingly.  They may bring on a conflict.  That is why I am making
ready in case we advance and that is why I cabled today for the rest of
my kit.  I have a fine little pony, and a little messenger boy who
speaks Spanish, to look after the horse, and me.

And now, as to your LETTERS, they came to-day, five of them, COUNT 'EM,
and the pictures did make me laugh.  I showed those of the soldier
commandeering the vegetables to Funston and he laughed.  And, I did
love the flowers you sent no matter HOW homesick they made me!  (Oh).
I do not want a camera.

I have one, and those fancy cameras I don't understand.

The letters you forwarded were wonderfully well selected.  I mean,
those from other people.  One of them was from Senator Root telling me
Bryan is going to reward our three heroic officers who jumped into the
ocean.  I know you will be glad.  There are NO mosquitoes!  Haven't met
up with but three and THEY are not COMING BACK.

I send you a picture of my room from the outside.  From the inside the
view is so "pretty."  Across the square is the cathedral and the trees
are filled with birds that sing all night, and statues, and pretty
globes.  The band plays every night and when it plays "Hello, Winter
Time," I CRY for you.  I paid the band-master $20 to play it, and it is
WORTH IT.  I sit on the balcony and think of you and know just what you
are doing, for there is only an hour and a half difference.  That is,
when with you it is ten o'clock with me it is eight-thirty.  So when
you and Louise are at dinner you can know I am just coming in from my
horseback ride to bathe and "nap."  And when at eight-thirty you are
playing the Victor, I am drinking a cocktail to you, and shooing away
the Colonels and Admirals who interfere with my ceremony of drinking to
my dear wife.



VERA CRUZ, May 20th, 1914.

DEAREST WIFE:

I got SUCH a bully letter yesterday from you, written long ago from the
Webster.  It said you missed me, and it said you loved me, and there
were funny pictures of you reading the war and peace news each with a
different expression, and you told me about Padrigh and how he runs
down the road.  It made me very sad and homesick, but very glad to feel
I was so missed.  Also you told me cheerful falsehoods about my Tribune
stories.  I know they are no good, and as they are no good, the shorter
the better, but I like to be told they are good.  Anyway, I sat down at
once and wrote a long screed on Vera Cruz and the sleepy people that
five here.

We all live on the sidewalk under the stone porch.  Every night a table
is reserved and by my orders ALL chairs, except mine, are removed.  So
no one can sit down and bore me while I am dining.  Another trick I
have to be left alone is to carry a big roll of cable blanks, and I
pretend to write out cables if anyone tries to talk.  Then I beckon the
messenger (he always sits in the plaza) and say "File that!" and he
goes once around the block and reports back that it is "filed."  If the
bore renews the attack I write another cable, and the unhappy messenger
makes another tour.  The band plays from seven to eight every night.
There are five bands, and I saw no reason why there should not be music
every evening.  After a day in this dirty hotel or dirty city a lively
band helps.  Funston agreed, but forgot, until after three nights with
no band, I wrote him a letter.  It was signed by fake names, asking if
he couldn't get nineteen German musicians into a bandstand how could he
hope to get ten thousand soldiers into Mexico City.  So now we have a
band each night.  That is all my day.  After dinner I sit at table and
the men bring up chairs, or else I go to some other table.  There are
some damn fool women here who are a nuisance, and they now have dancing
in the hotel adjoining, but I don't know them, except to bow, and I
approve of the tango parties because it keeps them away from the
sidewalk.  They ire "refugees," the sort of folks you meet at Ocean
Grove, or rather DON'T meet!  All love to you, and give Patrigh a pat
from his Uncle Richard for looking after you and looking for me, and
remember me to Louise and Shu and everything at home.  I love you so.

RICHARD.


VERA CRUZ, May 28, 1914.

I want to be home to see the daisy field with you.  That knee you
nearly busted tobogganing when the daisy field was an iceberg is now
recovered.

The one and all came this morning and as I expected it was all full of
love from you.  I DID get happiness out of the thought you put in it.
And all done in an hour.  The underclothes made me weep.  I could get
none here.  Not because Mexicans are not as large as I am, but because
no Mexican of any size would wear 'em.  So I've had to wash the few
that the washer-woman didn't destroy myself.  And when I saw the lot
you sent!  It was like a white sale!  Also the quinine which I tasted
just for luck, and the soap in the little violet wrapper made me quite
homesick.  Especially was I glad to get socks and pongee suits, and
shirts.  I really was getting desperate.  God knows what I would have
done without them.

I want to see you so much, and I want to see you in the same setting of
other days, I want to walk with you in the daisy field, and in the
laurel blossoms, and clip roses.  But to be with you I'd be willing to
walk on broken glass.  Not you, too.  Just me.

RICHARD.



VERA CRUZ--June 4, 1914.

DEAR OLD MAN:

I am awfully sorry for your sake, you could not get away.  Of course
for myself I am glad that I am to see you and Dai.  At least, I hope I
am.  God alone knows when we will get out of here.  I am sick of it.
Next time I go to war both armies must fight for two months before I
will believe they mean it, and BEFORE I WILL BUDGE.

It is true I am getting good money, but also there is absolutely
NOTHING to write about.  Bryan doesn't know that unless he talks by
code every radio on sixteen ships can read every message he sends to
these waters.  And the State Department saying it could not understand
the Hyranga giving up her cargo is a damn silly lie.  No one is so
foolish as to think the Chester and Tacomah let her land those arms
under their guns unless they had been told to submit to it.  And yet
today, we get papers of the 29th in which Bryan says he has twice
cabled Badger for information, when for a week Badger has been reading
Bryan's orders to consuls to let the arms be landed.  Can you beat
that?  This is an awful place, and if I don't write it is because I
hate to harrow your feelings.  It is a town of flies, filth and heat.
John McCutcheon is the only friend I have seen, and he sensibly lives
on a warship.  I can't do that, as cables come all the time suggesting
specials, and I am not paid to loaf.  John is here on a vacation, and
can do as he pleases.  But I ride around like any cub reporter.  And
there is no news.  Since I left home I have not talked five minutes to
a woman "or mean to!"  The Mexican women are a cross between apes and
squaws.  Of all I have seen here nothing has impressed me so as the
hideousness of the women, girls, children, widows, grandmothers.  And
the refugees, as Collier would say it, are "terrible!"  I live a very
lonely existence.  I find it works out that way best.  And at the same
time all the correspondents are good friends, and I don't find that
there is one of them who does not go out of his way to SHOW he is
friendly.  What I CAN'T understand is why no one at home never guesses
I might like to read some of my own stories. . . .

DICK.


Of these days in Vera Cruz John T. McCutcheon wrote the following
shortly after Richard's death:

"Davis was a conspicuous figure in Vera Cruz, as he inevitably had been
in all such situations.  Wherever he went, he was pointed out.  His
distinction of appearance, together with a distinction in dress, which,
whether from habit or policy, was a valuable asset in his work, made
him a marked man.  He dressed and looked the 'war correspondent,' such
a one as he would describe in one of his stories.  He fulfilled the
popular ideal of what a member of that fascinating profession should
look like.  His code of life and habits was as fixed as that of the
Briton who takes his habits and customs and games and tea wherever he
goes, no matter how benighted or remote the spot may be.

"He was just as loyal to his code as is the Briton.  He carried his
bath-tub, his immaculate linen, his evening clothes, his war
equipment--in which he had the pride of a connoisseur--wherever he
went, and, what is more, he had the courage to use the evening clothes
at times when their use was conspicuous.  He was the only man who wore
a dinner coat in Vera Cruz, and each night, at his particular table in
the crowded 'Portales,' at the Hotel Diligencia, he was to be seen, as
fresh and clean as though he were in a New York or London restaurant.

Each day he was up early to take the train out to the 'gap,' across
which came arrivals from Mexico City.  Sometimes a good 'story' would
come down, as when the long-heralded and long-expected arrival of
Consul Silliman gave a first-page 'feature' to all the American papers.

"In the afternoon he would play water polo over at the navy aviation
camp, and always at a certain time of the day his 'striker' would bring
him his horse and for an hour or more he would ride out along the beach
roads within the American lines."

    .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

On June 15 Richard sailed on the Utah for New York, arriving there on
the 22d.  For a few weeks after his return he remained at Mount Kisco
completing his articles on the Mexican situation but at the outbreak of
the Great War he at once started for Europe, sailing with his wife on
August 4, the day war was declared between England and Germany.



On Lusitania--August 8, 1914.

DEAR CHAS:

We got off in a great rush, as the Cunard people received orders to
sail so soon after the Government had told them to cancel all
passengers, that no one expected to leave by her, and had secured
passage on the Lorraine and St. Paul.

They gave me a "regal" suite which at other times costs $1,000 and it
is so darned regal that I hate to leave it.  I get sleepy walking from
one end of it to the other; and we have open fires in each of the three
rooms.  Generally when one goes to war it is in a transport or a troop
train and the person of the least importance is the correspondent.  So,
this way of going to war I like.  We now are a cruiser and are slowly
being painted grey, and as soon as they got word England was at war all
lights were put out and to find your way you light matches.  You can
imagine the effect of this Ritz Carlton idea of a ship wrapped in
darkness.  Gerald Morgan is on board, he is also accredited to The
Tribune, and Frederick Palmer.  I do not expect to be allowed to see
anything but will try to join a French army.  I will leave Bessie near
London with Louise at some quiet place like Oxford or a village on the
Thames.  We can "take" wireless, but not send it, so as no one is
sending and as we don't care to expose our position, we get no news.
We are running far North and it is bitterly cold.  I think Peary will
sue us for infringing his copyrights.

I will try to get in touch with Nora.  I am worried lest she cannot get
at her money.  As British subjects no other thing should upset them.
Address me American Embassy, London.  I send such love to you both.
God bless you.

DICK.


Richard arrived in Liverpool August 13, and made arrangements for his
wife to remain in London.  Unable to obtain credentials from the
English authorities, he started for Brussels and arrived there in time
to see the entry of the German troops, which he afterward described so
graphically.  Indeed this article is considered by many to be one of
the finest pieces of descriptive writing the Great War has produced.

For several days after Brussels had come under the control of the
Germans Richard remained there and then decided to go to Paris as the
siege of the French capital at the time seemed imminent.  He and his
friend Gerald Morgan, who was acting as the correspondent of the London
Daily Telegraph, decided to drive to Hal and from there to continue on
foot until they had reached the English or French armies where they
knew they would be among friends.  At Hal they were stopped by the
German officials and Morgan wisely returned to Brussels.  However,
Richard having decided to continue on his way, was promptly seized by
the Germans and held as an English spy.  For a few days he had a most
exciting series of adventures with the German military authorities and
his life was frequently in danger.  It was finally due to my brother's
own strategy and the prompt action of our Ambassador to Belgium, Brand
Whitlock, that he was returned to Brussels and received his official
release.

On August 27, Richard left Brussels for Paris on a train carrying
English prisoners and German wounded, and en route saw much of the
burning and destruction of Louvain.



BRUSSELS, August 17, 1914.

DEAREST:

Write me soon and often!  All is well here so long as I know you are
all right, so do not fail to tell me all, and keep me in touch.  If _I_
do not write much it is because letters do not get through always, and
are read.  But you know I love you, and you know twice each day I pray
for you and wish for you all the time.  I feel as though I had been
gone a month.  Gerald Morgan and I got in last night; this is a
splendid new hotel; for $2.50 I get a room and bath like yours on the
"royal suite," only bigger.  This morning the minister did everything
he could for us.  There are about twenty Americans who want
credentials.  They say they will take no Americans, but to our minister
they said they would make exception in favor of three, so I guess the
three will be John McCutcheon, Palmer and myself.  John and I, if
anyone gets a pass, are sure.  With the passes we had, Gerald and I
started out in a yellow motor, covered with flags of the Allies, and
saw a great deal.  How I wished you were with me, you would so have
loved it.  The country is absolutely beautiful.  We were stopped every
quarter mile to show our passes and we got a working idea of how it
will be.  Tonight I dined with Mr. Whitlock, the minister, and John
McCutcheon came in and Irving Cobb.  John and I will get together and
go out.  All you need is a motor car and you can go pretty much
everywhere, EXCEPT near where there is fighting.  So what I am to do to
earn my wages I don't know.  I am now going to bed and I send my
darlin' all love.  Today I sent you a wire.  If it got to you let me
know.  Take such good care of yourself.  Remember me to Louise, and,
WRITE ME.  All love, DEAR, DEAR one.  My wife and my sweetheart.

Your husband,

RICHARD.


The following is the last letter that got through.



BRUSSELS, August 21, 1914.

DEAREST ONE:

I cannot say much, as I doubt if this will be opened by you.  The
German army came in and there was no fighting and I am very well.  I am
only distressed at not being able to get letters from you, and not
being able to send them.  I will write a long one, and hold it until I
am sure of some way by which it can reach you.

YOU KNOW WHAT I WOULD SAY.



Mrs. Davis had waited in London to meet Richard on his return from the
war, but a misunderstanding as to the date of his return, coupled with
her strong sense of duty to his interests at home, gave occasion for
the letter which follows:


LONDON, August 31, 1914.

DEAREST ONE:

Not since the Herald Square days have I had such a blow as when I drove
up to 10 Clarges, and found you gone! IT WAS NOBODY'S FAULT!  YOU WERE
SO RIGHT to go; and I COULD NOT COME.  I am so distressed lest it was
my cable saying I could not get back that decided you to go before the
fifth.  But Ashford says it was not.  He tells me the cable came at
THREE in the morning and that you had arranged to be called at
six-thirty in order to leave for Scotland.  So, for sending that cable
I need not blame myself too much.  I sent you so many messages I do not
know which got through.  But I think it must have been one saying I
could not return in time to see you before the fifth.  THEN, no trains
were running.  The very NEXT DAY the Germans started a troop train, and
I took it.  The reason I could not come by automobile was because I had
a falling out with the "mad dogs" and they would not give me a pass.
So Evans, with whom I was to motor to Holland, got through Friday
afternoon and sent the cable.  As soon as I reached Holland, I cabled I
was coming and kept on telegraphing every step of the journey, which
lasted three days.

I telegraphed last from Folkestone; even telling you what to have for
my supper.  As you directed, Ashford opened the cables, and when I
drove up, he was at the door in tears.  He had made a light in your
rooms and, of course, as I looked up I thought you still were in them.
When they told me I was a day late, I cried, too.  It was the bitterest
disappointment I ever knew.  I had taken the very first train out of
Brussels, the one with the wounded, and for three days had been having
one hell of a time.  But I kept thinking of seeing you, and hearing
your dear voice.  So the trip did not matter.  I was only thinking of
SEEING YOU, and thanking God I was shut of the dirty Germans.  We had
nothing to eat, and we slept on the floor of the train, the Germans
kept us locked in, and, all through even Holland, we were under arrest.
But nothing mattered, because I was so happy at thought of meeting you.
As I said neither of us was at fault.  You just HAD to go, and I could
NOT COME.  But, you can feel how I felt to learn you were at sea.

I was so glad I could use your old rooms.  I went to the table where
you used to write and was so glad I could at least be as near to you as
that.  No other place in London could have held me that night.  Not
Buckingham Palace.  I found little things you had left.  I loved even
the funny pictures on the wall because we had talked of them together.
It was ROTTEN, ROTTEN luck.  But only the Germans and their hellish war
were to blame.  I drove straight to the cable office, and tried to
wireless you, knowing you would feel glad to know I was well, and safe
and sound.  But the cable people could not send my message.  You were
then out of reach of wireless, on the Irish coast.  And for nine days
there was no way to tell you I had come back as fast as trains and
boats and the dirty Germans would let me.  Oh, my dear, dear one, HOW I
LOVE you.  If only I could have seen you for just five minutes.  As it
was, I thought for five days more we would be together.  What I shall
do now, I don't know.  I must go back with either the French or the
English until my contract expires, and then, I can join you.  Tomorrow
I am trying to see Asquith and Churchill to get with the army.  And I
will at once return across the channel.  But, do not worry!  I will
never again let a German come within ONE MILE of me!  After this,
between me and the Germans, there will be some hundreds of thousands of
English or French.  So after this reaches you I will soon be on my way
HOME.  Don't worry.  Get James back and Amelia and everyone else who
can make you comfortable, and trust in the good Lord.  I have your
cross and St. Rita around my neck, and in spite of what the Kaiser
says, God is looking after other people than Germans.  Certainly he has
taken good care of me.  And he will guard you, and our "blessed" one.
And in a little time, dear, DEAR heart, I will be back, and I will
become a grocer.  God love you and keep you, as he does.  And you will
never know HOW I LOVE YOU!  Good night, dearest, sweetheart and wife!
I am writing this at your table, and, thanking God you are going to the
farm, and to peace and happiness.  I SEND YOU ALL THE LOVE IN ALL THE
WORLD.

RICHARD.


LONDON, September 3rd.

MY DEAREST ONE:

It was a full moon again tonight and I think you were on deck and saw
it, because by now, you have passed the four days at sea and should be
in the St. Lawrence.  So I knew you saw the moon, too, and I sent you a
kiss, via it.  It was just over St. James Palace but also it was just
over you.

Today has been a day of worries.  Wheeler cabled that the papers wanted
me to be "neutral" and not write against the Germans.  As I am not
interested in the German vote, or in advertising of German breweries
(such a hard word to SAY) I thought, considering the EXCLUSIVE stories
I had sent them, instead of kicking, they ought to be sending me a few
bouquets.  Especially, as I got cables from Gouvey, Whigham, Scribner's
and others congratulating me on the anti-German stories.  So I cabled
Wheeler to tell papers of his syndicate, dictation from them as to what
I should write was "unexpected," that they could go to name-of-place
censored and that if he wished I would release him from his contract
tonight.  Considering that without credentials I was with French,
Belgian and German armies and saw entry of Germans into Brussels and
sacking of Louvain and got arrested as a spy, they were a bit
ungrateful.  I am now wondering WHAT I would have seen HAD I HAD
credentials.

I saw Anthony Hope at the club last night.  He had to go back to the
country, so I dined alone on English oysters.  Fancy anyone being
NEUTRAL in this war!  Germany dropping bombs in Paris and Antwerp on
women and churches and scattering mines in the channel where they blow
up fishermen and burning the cathedrals!  A man who now would be
neutral would be a coward.  Good night, NEAR, DEAR, DEAR one.  It has
been several weeks since I had sleep, so if I rave and wander in my
letters forgive me.  You know how I am thinking of you.  God bless you.
God keep you for me.

Your husband who loves you SO!


LONDON, September 7th.

DEAREST:

I just got your cable saying you were at the farm, and well!  HOW HAPPY
IT MADE ME!  I cabled you to Quebec, and to Mt.  Kisco, and when two
days passed and I heard nothing, today I was scared, so I cabled Gouvey
to look after you, and also to Wheeler.  I went to the Brompton Oratory
today, which is the second most important church here (the cardinal
lives at Westminster) and burned the BIGGEST CANDLE they had for you
and the "blessing."  A big woman all in black was kneeling in the
little chapel and when I could not get the candle to stand up, she
beckoned to one of the priests, and he ran and fixed it.  Then she went
on praying.  And WHO do you think she was?  Queen Amelie of Portugal,
you see her pictures in the Tattler and Sphere opening bazaars.  So she
must be very good or she would not be saying her prayers all alone with
the poor people and seeing that my Bessie's candle was burning.  I have
been waiting here hoping to get some sort of credentials from
Kitchener.  But though Winston Churchill has urged him, and tomorrow is
going to urge him again, they give me no hope.  So I'll just go over
"on my own" and I bet I'll see more than anyone else.  I have fine
papers, anyhow.  I am now writing Scribner article, so THAT is off my
mind.  And now that you are home, I have no "worries." I wish I had got
your cable earlier.  I would have had oysters and champagne in BATH
TUBS.  Give my love to all the flowers, and to Shea and Paedrig, and
Tom, and Louise, and Gouvey and the lake.  And take SUCH good care of
yourself, and love me, and be happy for I do so love you dear one.  I
DO SO LOVE YOU.

YOUR HUSBAND.


September 15th.

DEAREST:

Tonight I got your cable in answer to mine asking if you were well.
All things considered twenty-four hours was not so long for them to get
the answer to me.  You BET I will be careful.  I don't want to get
nearer to a German than twenty miles.  At the battlefield I collected
five German spiked helmets but at the Paris gate they took ALL of them
from me.  I WAS mad!  I wanted to keep them in my "gym," and pound them
with Indian clubs.  I wrote all day yesterday, so today I did not work.
There is nothing more here to do.  And as soon as my contract is up
October 1st, I will make towards YOU!  Seeing the big battle was great
luck.  So far I have seen more than anyone.  I have had no credentials;
and yet have been with ALL the armies.  Now I am just beating time,
until I can get home.  The fighting is too far away even if I could go
to it.  But I can't without being arrested.  And I am fed up on being
arrested.  Today all the little children came out of doors.  They have
been locked up for fear of airships.  It was fine to see them playing
in the Champs Elysees and making forts out of pebbles, and rolling
hoops.

God loves you, dear one, and I trust in Him.  But I am awful sick for a
sight of you.  What a lot we will have to tell each other.  One thing I
never have to tell you, but it makes me happy when I can.  It is this:
I LOVE YOU!  And every minute I think of you.

With all my love.

Your

RICHARD.



PARIS, September 15th, 1914.

DEAR CHAS.:

I got this morning your letter of August 25th.  In it you say kind
things about my account of the Germans entering Brussels.  Nothing so
much pleases me as to get praise from you or to know my work pleases
you.  Since the Germans were pushed in every one here is breathing
again.  But for me it was bad as now the armies are too far to reach by
taxicab, and if you are caught anywhere outside the city you are
arrested and as a punishment sent to Tours.  Eight correspondents,
among them two Times men and John Reed and Bobby Dunn, were sent to
Tours Sunday.  I had another piece of luck that day with Gerald Morgan.
I taxicabed out to Soissons and saw a wonderful battle.  So, now I can
go home in peace.  Had I been forced to return without seeing any
fighting I never would have lived it down.  I am in my old rooms of
years ago.  I got the whole imperial suite for eight francs a day.  It
used to be 49 francs a day.  Of course, Paris that closes tight at nine
is hardly Paris, but the beauty of the city never so much impressed me.
There is no fool running about to take your mind off the gardens and
buildings.  What MOST makes me know I am in Paris, though, are the
packages of segars lying on the dressing table.  Give my love to Dai,
and tell her I hope soon to see you.  The war correspondent is dead.
My only chance was to get with the English who will take one American
and asked Bryan to choose, he passed it to the Press Association and
they chose Palmer.  But I don't believe the official correspondents
will be allowed to see much.  I saw the Germans enter Brussels, the
burning of Louvain and the Battle of Soissons and had a very serious
run in with the Germans and nearly got shot.  But now if you go out,
every man is after you, and even the gendarmes try to arrest you.  It
is sickening.  For never, of course, was there such a chance to
describe things that everyone wants to read about.  Again my love to
Dai and you.  I will see you soon.

RICHARD.


In October Richard returned to the United States and settled down to
complete his first book on the war.  During this period and indeed
until the hour of his death my brother devoted the greater part of his
time to the cause of the Allies.  He had always believed that the
United States should have entered the war when the Germans first
outraged Belgium, and to this effect he wrote many letters to the
newspapers.  In addition to this he was most active in various of the
charities devoted to the causes of the Allies, wrote a number of
appeals, and contributed money out of all proportion to his means.  The
following appeal he wrote for the Secours National:

"You are invited to help women, children and old people in Paris and in
France, wherever the war has brought desolation and distress.  To
France you owe a debt.  It is not alone the debt you incurred when your
great grandfathers fought for liberty, and to help them, France sent
soldiers, ships and two great generals, Rochambeau and La Fayette.  You
owe France for that, but since then you have incurred other debts.

"Though you may never have visited France, her art, literature, her
discoveries in Science, her sense of what is beautiful, whether in a
bonnet, a boulevard or a triumphal arch, have visited you.  For them
you are the happier; and for them also, to France you are in debt.

"If you have visited Paris, then your debt is increased a hundred fold.
For to whatever part of France you journeyed, there you found courtesy,
kindness, your visit became a holiday, you departed with a sense of
renunciation; you were determined to return.  And when after the war,
you do revisit France, if your debt is unpaid, can you without
embarrassment sink into debt still deeper?  What you sought Paris gave
you freely.  Was it to study art or to learn history, for the history
of France is the history of the world; was it to dine under the trees
or to rob the Rue de la Paix of a new model; was it for weeks to motor
on the white roads or at a cafe table watch the world pass?  Whatever
you sought, you found.  Now, as in 1776 we fought, to-day France fights
for freedom, and in behalf of all the world, against militarism that is
'made in Germany.'

"Her men are in the trenches; her women are working in the fields,
sweeping the Paris boulevards, lighting the street lamps.  They are
undaunted, independent, magnificently capable.  They ask no charity.
But from those districts the war has wrecked, there are hundreds of
thousands of women and little children without work, shelter or food.
To them throughout the war zone the Secours National gives instant
relief.  In one day in Paris alone it provides 80,000 free meals.  Six
cents pays for one of these meals.  One dollar from you will for a week
keep a woman or child alive.

"The story is that one man said, 'In this war the women and children
suffer most.  I'm awfully sorry for them!' and the other man said, 'Yes
I'm five dollars sorry.  How sorry are you?'

"If ever you intend paying that debt you owe to France do not wait
until the war is ended.  Now, while you still owe it, do not again
impose yourself upon her hospitality, her courtesy, her friendship.

"But, pay the debt now.

"And then, when next in Paris you sit at your favorite table and your
favorite waiter hands you the menu, will you not the more enjoy your
dinner if you know that while he was fighting on the Aisne, it was your
privilege to help a little in keeping his wife and child alive."

The winter of 1914-15 Richard and his wife spent in New York, and on
January 4, 1915, their baby, Hope, was born.  No event in my brother's
life had ever brought him such infinite happiness, and during the short
fifteen months that remained to him she was seldom, if ever, from his
thoughts, and no father ever planned more carefully for a child's
future than Richard did for his little daughter.

On April 11 my brother and his wife took Hope to Crossroads for the
first time.  In his diary of this time he writes, "Only home in the
world is the one I own.  Everything belongs.  It is so comfortable and
the lake and the streams in the woods where you can get your feet wet.
The thrill of thinking a stump is a trespasser!  You can't do that on
ten acres."

A cause in  which  Richard was  enormously  interested at this time was
that of the preparedness of his own country, and for it he worked
unremittingly.  In August, 1915, he went to Plattsburg, where he took a
month of military training.


PLATTSBTTRG, N.  Y.

August, 1915.

DEAR OLD MAN:

This is a very real thing, and STRENUOUS.  I know now why God invented
Sunday.  The first two days were mighty hard, and I had to work extra
to catch up.  I don't know a darned thing, and after watching soldiers
for years, find that I have picked up nothing that they have to learn.
The only things I have learned don't count here, as they might under
marching conditions.  My riding I find is quite good, and so is my
rifle shooting.  As you could always beat me at that you can see the
conditions are not high.  But being used to the army saddle helps me a
lot.  I have a steeple chaser on one side and a M. F. H. on the other,
and they can't keep in the saddle, and hate it with bitter oaths.  The
camp commander told me that was a curious development; that the best
gentlemen jockeys and polo players on account of the saddle, were sore,
in every sense.  Yesterday I rose at 5-30, assembled for breakfast at
six, took down tent to ventilate it, when a cloud meanly appeared, and
I had to put it up again.  Then in heavy marching order we drilled two
hours as skirmishers, running and hurling ourselves at the earth, like
falling on the ball, and I always seemed to fall where the cinder path
crossed the parade ground.  We got back in time to clean ourselves for
dinner at noon.  And then practised firing at targets.  At two we were
drilled as cavalry in extended order.  We galloped to a point, advanced
on foot, were driven back by an imaginary enemy, and remounted.  We
galloped as a squadron, and the sight was really remarkable when you
think the men had been together only four days.  But the horses had
been doing it for years.  All I had to do to mine was to keep on.  He
knew what was wanted as well as did the Captain.  After that we put on
our packs and paraded at retreat to the band.  Then had supper and
listened to a lecture.  I ache in every bone, muscle, and joint.  But
the riding has not bothered me.  It is only hurling the damned rifle at
myself.  At nine I am sound asleep.  It certainly is a great
experience, and, all the men are helping each other and the spirit is
splendid.  The most curious meetings come off and all kinds of men are
at it from college kids to several who are great grand fathers.
Russell Colt turned up and was very funny over his experiences.  He
said he saluted everybody and one man he thought was a general and
stood at attention to salute was a Pullman car conductor.  The food is
all you want, and very good.  I've had nothing to drink, but
sarsaparilla, but with the thirst we get it is the best drink I know.
I have asked to have no letters forwarded and if I don't write I hope
you will understand as during the day there is not a minute you are
your own boss and at night I am too stiff and sleepy to write.

All love to you.

DICK.



DEAREST:

It is now seven-thirty, and I have had twelve busy hours.  They made me
pass an examination as though for Sing Sing, then a man gave me a gun
that at first weighed eight pounds and then twenty.  He made me do all
sorts of things with it, such as sentries used to do to me.  Then I was
given the gun to keep, and packs, beds, blankets, and I made myself at
home in a tent; then I was moved to another tent with five other men.
Then I got a horse and they galloped us up and down a field for two
hours.  I lost ten pounds.  Then we were marched around to a band.  I
had a sergeant on either side of me, so I did not go wrong, OFTEN.
Then, aching in every bone and with my head filled with orders and
commands, I got into the lake and escaped.  You can believe I enjoyed
that bath.  It certainly is a fine thing, and I am glad I enrolled (for
every one has been as nice as could be), but I miss you and Hope
terribly.  It seems years since I saw you.  I am going to my cot quick.
It is now eight o'clock, and I feel like I had been beaten in a stone
crusher.  Kiss Hope's foot for me.

Your loving husband,

DICK.


Monday.

DEAREST ONE:

I got such a beautiful letter from you!  With pictures of Hope
playing with the Bunny.  It is the best picture yet.  I carry it next
to my heart because you made it, because it is of her.  And she sits up
now?  Well, I will miss the big clothes-basket.  I loved to see her in
it.  Years ago, when I left home, she was trying to crawl out of it.
What you tell me of her--knowing what you mean when you say "Kitty" and
"Bunny"--is wonderful.  How good it will be!  You must come close under
my arm, and tell me every little thing.  I feel so much better now that
we have broken into the last week, and are on the home stretch.  We
have broken the backbone of the long absence, and, the first thing you
know, I'll be telephoning to have you meet me at White Plains.

This is me sewing up a hole in my breeches.  The socks are drying on
the line, my rubber bath is on the right.  I am now going to Canada.
But I'll be back in half an hour; it's only 200 yards distant.  All the
folks here are French, and the signs are in French.  Last place we
halted I bought lumberman's socks to wear at night.  I sleep very well,
for I buy my raincoat full of hay from the nearest farmer, and sleep on
that.  Today we had another "battle."  It began at 7.30 and ended at
one o'clock.  We were kept going all that time, taking "cover" behind
railroad embankments and stone walls and in plowed fields, finally
ending with a bayonet charge.  I killed so many I stopped counting.

Don't let Hope forget her father.  Better put on a wrist-watch and my
horn spectacles, and hold her the wrong way, so she will be reminded of
her Dad.

Good-night, my dearest one.  You will never know how terribly I miss
you and love you, and want you in my arms, and you holding Hope so that
I can have all my happiness in one big armful of all that is good.

YOUR LOVING HUSBAND.



Wednesday.

DEAREST ONE:

The Vitagraph people came today.  They have a great film to stir people
to preparedness called "The Battle Cry of Peace." It shows New York
destroyed by Germans.  They took pictures of several of the
better-known men showing "them" preparing.  I was taken cleaning my
rifle, and, as the captain was passing, I asked him to get in the
picture with me and be shown instructing me.  He was delighted, but
right in the middle of the picture he "inspected" my barrel.  I had not
cleaned it, and he forgot the camera, and gave me the devil.  You can
imagine how the crowd roared, and the camera director man was
delighted.  I wanted it retaken showing the captain patting me on the
back.

Roosevelt turned up today, and was very nice.  Martin Egan came with
him and the British Naval Attache, and they have asked me to dine at a
real table at Hotel Champlain with two other men.  It will be fine to
eat off china.  The "hike" begins Friday, and we sleep each night on
the ground, but the country we march through is beautiful.  All that
counts is getting the days behind me and getting you in my arms.  Doing
one's "bit" for one's country is right, but as the man said, "God knows
I love my country and want to fight for her, but I hope to God I never
love another country."  Good-night, dear, dear one!  How wonderful it
will be to see and hear you again.  Kiss Hope for her Dad.

RICHARD.


Saturday.

DEAREST:

This is writing with all the love, but with difficulties.  I am sitting
on a log and the light is a candle.  Today we had our first fight.  It
happened the squad of eight men I am in was sent in advance, and I was
100 yards in front, so I was the first to come in touch with the scouts
of the Red Army, and I killed a lot.  My squad was so brave that we all
got killed THREE TIMES.  But as soon as the umpire rode away we would
come to life, and go on fighting.  Finally, he took us prisoners, and
made us sit down and look on at the battle.  As we had been running
around and each carrying a forty-pound pack, we were glad to remain
dead.  But we have declared that nothing can kill us tomorrow but
asphyxiating gas.  I have terrible nightmares for fear something has
happened to one of you, and then I trust in the good Lord, and pray him
to make the time pass swiftly.

Good-night, and all the love and kisses for you both.

RICHARD.


On October 19, 1915, Richard sailed on the Chicago for France and his
second visit to the Great War.  He arrived at Paris on October 30, and
shortly afterward visited the Western front at Amiens and Artois.  He
also interviewed Poincare, and through him the French President sent a
message to the American people.  At this time my brother had received
permission from the authorities to visit all of the twelve sectors of
the French front under particularly advantageous conditions, and was
naturally most anxious to do so.  However, through a misunderstanding
between the syndicate he represented and certain of the newspapers
using its service, he found it advisable, even although against his own
judgment, to go to Greece, and to postpone his visit to the sectors of
the French front he had not already seen.  On November 13 he left Paris
bound for Salonica.


On Way to France, Oct. 18, 1915.

DEAREST ONE:

You are much more brave than I am.  Anyway, you are much better
behaved.  For all the time you were talking I was crying, not with my
eyes only, but with ALL of me.  I am so sad.  I love you so, and I will
miss you so.  I want you to keep saying to yourself all the time, "This
is the most serious effort he ever made, because the chances of seeing
anything are so SMALL, and because never had he such a chance to HELP.
But, all the time, every minute he thinks of me.  He wants me.  He
misses my voice, my eyes, my presence at his side when he walks or
sleeps.  He never loved me so greatly, or at leaving me was so unhappy
as he is now."

Goodby, dear heart.  My God-given one!  Would it not be wonderful, if
tonight when I am up among the boats on the top deck that girl in the
Pierrot suit, and in her arms Hope, came, and I took them and held them
both?  You will walk with her at five, and I will walk and think of you
and love you and long for you.

God keep you, dearest of wives, and mothers.

RICHARD.


October 24.

MY DEAR DAUGHTER:

So many weeks have passed since I saw you that by now you are able to
read this without your mother looking over your shoulder and helping
you with the big words.  I have six sets of pictures of you.  Every day
I take them down and change them.  Those your dear mother put in glass
frames I do not change.  Also, I have all the sweet fruits and
chocolates and red bananas.  How good of you to think of just the
things your father likes.  Some of them I gave to a little boy and
girl.  I play with them because soon my daughter will be as big.  They
have no mother like you, OF COURSE; they have no mother like YOURS--for
except my mother there never was a mother like yours; so loving, so
tender, so unselfish and thoughtful.  If she is reading this, kiss her
for me.  These little children have a little father.  He dresses them
and bathes them himself.  He is afraid of the cold; and sits in the
sun; and coughs and shivers.  His children and I play hide-and-seek,
and, as you will know some day, for that game there is no such place as
a steamer, with boats and ventilators and masts and alleyways.  Some
day we will play that game hiding behind the rocks and trees and rose
bushes.  Every day I watch the sun set, and know that you and your
pretty mother are watching it, too.  And all day I think of you both.

Be very good.  Do not bump yourself.  Do not eat matches.  Do not play
with scissors or cats.  Do not forget your dad.  Sleep when your mother
wishes it.  Love us both.  Try to know how we love you.  THAT you will
never learn.  Good-night and God keep you, and bless you.

YOUR DAD.


PARIS, November 1.

DEAREST ONE:

Today is "moving" day, and I feel like ---- censored word, at the
thought of your having the moving to direct and manage by yourself.  I
can picture Barney and Burke loading, and unloading, and coal and wood
being stored, and provisions and ice, and finally Hope brought down to
take her third--no--fourth motor ride.  And God will see she makes it
all safely, and that in her new house you are comfortable.

Last night I dreamed about Hope and you, a long dream, and it made me
so happy.  Something happened today that you will like to hear.  When
the war came the French students at the Beaux Arts had to go to fight.
The wives and children had nothing to live on.  So, the American
students, about a dozen of them, organized a relief league.  The Beaux
Arts is in a most wonderful palace built by Cardinal Richelieu and
decorated later by Napoleon.  In this they were gathering socks,
asphyxiating masks, warm clothes.  They were hand painting postcards
for fifty cents apiece.  The "masters" as they call their teachers,
also were painting them.  I gave them some money which was received
politely, but, as it would not go far, without much enthusiasm.  As I
was going, I said, "I'll be back tomorrow to get some facts and I'll
write a story about what you're doing." This is the part that is
embarrassing to write, but you will understand.  They gave a cheer and
a yell just as though I had said, "Peace is declared" or "I will give
you Carnegie's fortune."  And they danced around, and shook hands, and
Whitney Warren, who is at the head of it, all but cried.  Later, he
told me the letter I had written for his wife's fund for orphans by the
war had brought in $5000, that was why they were so pleased.  So we,
you and I, will try to look at it that way, and try to believe that
from this separation, which is cruel for us, others may get some
benefit.  Tomorrow, I am to be received at the Elysee by the President,
and I am going to try to make him say something that will draw money
from America for the French hospitals.  If he will only ask, I know our
people will give.  In a day or two, I think I will be allowed to see
something, but, that you will know best by reading The Times.

Your loving husband is lonely for you, and so it will be always.

RICHARD.


November 17th.

DEAR SWEETHEART:

My last letter was such a complaining one that I am ashamed.  But, not
leaving me to decide what was best for the papers, made me mad.  Since
I wrote, I ought to be madder, for I have been to the trenches outside
of Rheims in Champagne; and, had they not deviled the spirit out of me
with cables, I believe I could have written such a lot of stories of
France that no one else has had the opportunity to write.  Believe me
no one has yet told the story of the trench war.  Anyway, in spite of
all the photographs and articles, to me it was all new.  I was allowed
to go alone, and given carte blanche to see whatever I wished.  I saw
everything, but it would not be possible to write of it yet.  It was
wonderful.  I was in the three lines, reaching the FIRST line by
moonlight.  No one spoke above a whisper.  The Germans were only 300 to
400 yards distant.  But worst of all were the rats.  They ran over my
feet and I was a darned sight more afraid of them than the Germans.  I
saw the Cathedral, and the only hotel open (from which I sent you and
Hope a postal) was the same one in which we stopped a year ago.  I had
sent the hotel my book in which I said complimentary things, and I got
a great welcome.  They even gave me a room with a fire in it, and so I
was warm for the first time since I left the Crossroads.  And this
morning it SNOWED.  On my way back to Paris, I stopped to tell the
General what I had seen and to thank him.  He said, "Oh, that is
nothing.  When you return, I will take you out myself, and I will show
you something worth while."  I am going to carry a rat-trap, and two
terriers on a leash.  Tonight, when I got back, there was a letter from
you, but no writing, but there was a photo of Her, and me holding her.
How is it possible that any living thing is so beautiful as my child?
How fat, and wonderful, and dear, and lovable, and how terribly I want
to hold her as I am holding her in the picture, and how much better as
I really don't need my left arm to hold such a mite), if I had you
close to me in it.  I miss you so, and love you so!  I told Wheeler
before I left as I was not going to waste time traveling I would not go
to Servia.  So, as soon as I arrived, I was fretted with cables to go.
I cabled to stop giving me advice, that I had a much better chance in
France than anyone could have anywhere else.  Maybe, before I arrive,
the Greeks will have joined the Germans, in which case, I WON'T LEAVE
THE SHIP.  I'll come straight back on her to the Allies.

RICHARD.


November 20th.

This is the way Hope's cat looks, "My whiskers!" she says, "I never
knew I was to be let in for anything like this!"  When I told her about
the big rats in the trenches she wanted to go with me next time, but,
today when I told her that the Crown Prince of Servia made his servants
eat live mice (he is no longer Crown Prince), she looked just as she
does in the picture.  "Then, what do _I_ eat in Servia?" she said, and
I told her both of us would live on goat's milk.

You will be glad when I tell you I have been, warm.  We came pretty far
south in two days, and, the damp chill of Paris is gone.  On the train
a funny thing happened.  An English officer and I got talking and he
was press censor at Salonica where I am going after Athens.  I asked
him to look over the many letters I had and tell me if any of them
would be likely to get me in bad, being addressed to pro-Germans, for
example.  He said, "Well, THIS chap is all right anyway.  I'll  vouch
for him, because this letter is addressed to me."

  SEE THE CAT!
  HOPE GAVE THE CAT TO HER DAD.
  IS THE CAT SAD?
  YES
  IS THE DAD SAD?
  VERY!!
  WHY IS THE CAT AND THE DAD SAD?
  THEY WANT HOME AND HOPE.
  DO THEY LOVE HOPE?
  DON'T MAKE THEM LAUGH!


We leave, the Basses, the English officer and I, in a small tub of a
boat for Patras, and train to Athens.  I will try to go at once to
Servia.  Harjes, who are the Paris house of J. P. Morgan, gave me a
"mission" to try and organize for the Servians the same form of relief
as has been arranged for the Belgians.  He gave me permission if I saw
the need for help was imminent (and it will be) to cable him for
whatever I thought the Serbs most needed.  So, it is a chance to do
much.  To get out news will be impossible.  However, here I am and
tomorrow I'll be good and seasick.

I have your charm around my neck, and all the pictures, and the
luck-bringing cat, and the scapular, and the love you give me to keep
me well and bring us soon together.  That is the one thing I want.  God
bless you both, Hope's dad and your husband.



ATHENS,

November 26th.

DEAR HEART:

I am off tonight for Salonica.  I am not very cheerful for I miss you
very, very terribly, and the further I go, the worse I feel.  But now I
am nearly as far as I can get, and when you receive this I will--thank
God--be turned back to Paris, and London, and HOME!  I thought so often
of you this morning when I took a holiday and climbed the Acropolis.
On the top of it I picked a dandelion for you.  It was growing between
the blocks of marble that have been there since 400 years before our
Lord: before St. Paul preached to the Athenians.  I was all alone on
the rock, and could see over the AEgean Sea, Corinth, Mount Olympus,
where the Gods used to sit, and the Sphinx lay in wait for travelers
with her famous riddle.  It takes two days and one night to go to
Salonica, and the boats are so awful no one undresses but sleeps in his
clothes on top of the bed.

Goodby, sweetheart, and give SUCH a kiss to my precious daughter.  How
beautiful she is.  Even the waiter who brought me a card stopped to
exclaim about her picture.  So, of course, being not at all proud I
showed him her in my arms.  I want you both so and I love you both SO.
And, I wanted you so this morning as I always do when there is a
beautiful landscape, or flowers, or palms.  I know how you love them.
The dandelion is very modest and I hope the censor won't lose it out,
for she has a long way to go and carries a burden of love.  I wish I
was bringing them in the door of the Scribner cottage at this very
minute.

RICHARD.


VOLO, November 27.

I got here today, after the darnedest voyage of two days in a small
steamer.  We ran through a snow storm and there was no way to warm the
boat.  So, I DIED.  You know how cold affects me--well--this was the
coldest cold I ever died of.  I poured alcohol in me, and it was like
drinking iced tea.  Now, I am on shore in a cafe near a stove.  We
continue on to Salonica at midnight.  There are 24 men and one woman,
Mrs. Bass, on board.  I am much too homesick to write more than to say
I love you, and I miss you and Hope so, that I don't look at the
photos.  Did you get the cable I sent Thanksgiving--from Athens, it
read:  "Am giving thanks for Hope and you."  I hope the censor let that
get by him.  The boat I was on was a refrigerator ship; it was also
peculiar in that the captain dealt baccarat all day with the
passengers.  It was a sort of floating gambling house.  This is
certainly a strange land.  Snow and roses and oranges, all at once.  I
must stop.  I'm froze.  Give the kiss I want to give to Her, and know,
oh! how I love and love and love her mother--NEVER SO MUCH AS NOW.


SALONICA November 30th, 1915.

DEAR OLD MAN:

I got here to night and found it the most picturesque spot I ever
visited.  I am glad I came.  It was impossible to get a room but I
found John McCutcheon and two other men occupying a grand suite and
they have had a cot put in for me.  To-morrow I hope to get a room.
The place is filled with every nation except Germans and even they are
here out of uniforms.  We had a strange time coming.  The trip from
Athens should have taken two nights and a day but we took four.  The
Captain of the boat anchored and played baccarat whenever he thought
there were enough passengers not seasick to make it worth his while.
He played from eleven in the morning until four in the morning.  I
don't know now who ran the ship.  It is so cold when you bathe, the
steam runs off you.  I never have suffered so.  But, it looked as
though every one else was singing "Its going to be a hard, hard winter"
from the way they, dress.  Tomorrow I am going to buy fur pants.  You
can't believe what a picture it is.  Servians, French, Greeks, Scots in
kilts, London motor cars, Turks, wounded and bandaged Tommies and
millions of them fighting for food, for drink, for a place at the
"movies," and more "rumors" than there are words in the directory.
To-morrow, I present my letters and hope to get to the "front."  I only
hope the front doesn't come to us. But, it ought to be a place for
great stories.  All love to you old man, and bless you both.  How I
look forward to our first lunch in your wonderful home!  And to sit in
front of your fire, and hear all the news.  All love to you both.

RICHARD.


December 6, 1915.

DEAREST ONE:

I have been away so could not write.  They took us to the French and
English "front" and away from Greece; we were in Bulgaria and Servia.
It was at a place where the three boundaries met.  We saw remarkable
mountain ranges and deep snow, and some fine artillery.  But throwing
shells into that bleak, white jumble of snow and rocks--there was fifty
miles of it--was like throwing a baseball at the Rocky Mountains.
Still, it was seeing something.  Now, I have a room, and a very
wonderful one.  I had to bribe everyone in the hotel to get it; and I
have something to write and, no more moving about I hope, for at least
a week.  I am able to see the ships at anchor for miles, and the
landing stage for all the warships is just under my window.  As near as
McCoy Rock from the terrace.  It is like a moving picture all the time.
I bought myself an oil stove and a can of Standard oil, and, instead of
trying to warm the hotel with my body, I let George do it.  But it is a
very small stove, and to really get the good of it, I have to sit with
it between my legs.  Still, it is such a relief to be alone, and not to
pack all the time.  McCutcheon and Bass, Hare and Shepherd are fine,
but I felt like the devil, imposing on them, and working four in a room
is no joke.  We dine together each night.  Except them, I see no one,
but have been writing.  Also, I have been collecting facts about
Servian relief.  Harjes, Morgan's representative in Paris, gave me
carte blanche to call on him for money or supplies; but I waited until
today to cable, so as to be sure where help was most needed.  It is
still cold, but that AWFUL cold spell was quite unprecedented and is
not likely to come again.  I NEVER suffered so from cold, and, as you
know, I suffer considerable.  All the English officers who had hunted
in cold places, said neither had they ever felt such cold.  Seven
hundred Tommies were frost bitten and toes and fingers fell off.  I do
not say anything about how awful it is not to hear.  But, if I had had
your letters forwarded to this dump of the Levant, I never would have
got them.  Now, I have to wait for them until I get to Paris, but there
I will surely get them.  Cables, of course, can reach me, but no cables
mean to me that you are all right.  Nor do I want to "talk" about
Christmas.

You know how I feel about that, and about missing the first one SHE has
had.  But it will be the LAST one we will know apart.  Never again!

I want you in my arms and to hear you laugh and see your eyes.  I am in
need of you to make a fuss over me.  McCutcheon and Co. don't care
whether I have cold hands or not.  You do.  Your ointment and gloves
saved my fingers from falling off like the soldiers' did.  And your
"housewife" I use to put on buttons, and, your scapular and medal keep
me well.  But your love is what really lifts me up and consoles me.
When I think how you and I care for each other, then, I am scared, for
it is very beautiful.  And we must not ever be away from each other
again.  God keep you my beloved, and both my blessings.  I cannot bear
it--when I think of all I am missing of her, and, all that she is
doing.  God guard you both.  My darling and dear wife and mother of
Hope.

Your husband,

RICHARD.


SALONICA, December 18th.

DEAREST WIFE AND SWEETHEART:

I am very blue tonight, and NEVER was so homesick.  Yesterday just to
feel I was in touch with you I sent a cable through the fog, it said,
"Well, homesick, all love to you both."  I did not ask if you and Hope
were well, because I KNOW the good Lord will not let any harm come to
you.  I am certainly caught by the heels this time.  And it will be the
last time.  As you know, I meant only to go to France where no time
would be wasted in travel, and I would be able to get back soon.  But
the blockade held up the ship and on the other one the captain stayed
at anchor, and, then when I got here, the Allies retreated, and I had
to stay on to cover what is to come next.  What that is, or whether
nothing happens, you will know by the time this reaches you.  So, here
I am.  For TEN days until this morning we have never seen the sun.  In
sixty years nothing like it has happened.  The Salonicans said the
English transports brought the fog with them.  Anyway, I got it.  My
room is right on the harbor.  I never thought I would LOVE an oil
stove.  I always thought they were ill-smelling, air-destroying.  But
this one saved my life.  I wrote with it between my knees, I dry my
laundry on it, and use the tin pan on top of it to take the dampness
out of the bed.  The fog kept everything like a sponge.  Coal is thirty
dollars a ton.  To get wood for firewood the boatmen row miles out, and
wait below the transports to get the boxes they throw overboard.  I go
around asking EVERYBODY if this place is not now a dead duck for news.
But they all give me no encouragement.  They say it is the news center
of the world.  I hope it chokes.  I try to comfort myself by thinking
you are happy, because you have Hope, and I have nobody, except John
McCutcheon and Bass and Jimmie Hare, and they are as blue as I am, and
no one can get any money.  I cabled today to Wheeler for some via the
State Department.  I went to the Servian camp for the little orphans
whose fathers have been killed, and they all knelt and kissed my hands.
It was awful.  I thought of Hope, and hugged a few and carried them
around in my arms and felt much better.  Today for the first time, I
quit work and went to see an American film at the cinema to cheer me.
But when I saw the streetcars, and "ready to wear" clothes, and the
policemen I got suicidal.  I went back and told the others and they all
rushed off to see "home" things, and are there now.  This is a yell of
a letter, but it's the only kind I can write.   My stories and cables
are rotten, too.  I have seen nothing--just traveled and waited for
something to happen.  Goodnight, dearest one.  I love you so.  You will
never know how much I love you.  Kiss my darling for me, and, think
only of the good days when we will be together again.  Such good days.
Goodnight again--all love.

RICHARD.


HARBOR SALONICA, December 19th.

I am a happy man tonight!  And that is the first time I have been able
to say so since I left you.  The backbone of the trip is broken! and my
face is turned West--toward you and Hope.  John McCutcheon gave me a
farewell dinner tonight of which I got one half, as the police made me
go on board at nine, although we do not sail until five in the morning.
So there was time for only one toast, as I was making for the door.
Was it to your husband?  It was not.  It was to Hope Davis, two weeks
yet of being one year old, and being toasted by the war correspondents
in Salonica.  They knew it would please me.  And I went away very
choken and happy.  SUCH a boat as this is! I have a sofa in the
dining-room, and at present it is jammed with refugees and all smoking
and not an air port open.  What a relief it will be to once more get
among clean people.  We must help the Servians, and God knows they need
help.  But, if they would help each other, or themselves, I would like
them better.  I am now on deck under the cargo light and, on the top
floor of the Olympus Hotel, can see John's dinner growing gayer and
gayer.  It is like the man who went on a honeymoon alone.  I am so
happy tonight.  You seem so near now that I am coming West.

How terribly I have missed you, and wanted you, and longed for your
voice and LAUGH, and to have you open the door of my writing room, and
say, "A lady is coming to call on you," and then enter the dearest wife
and dearest baby in the world!

God bless you, and all my love.

RICHARD.


ROME,

Christmas Eve, 1915.

MY DEAREST, DEAREST, DEAREST:

I planned to get to Paris late Christmas night. I cabled Frazier at the
Embassy, to have all my letters at the Hotel de l'Empire.  I MEANT to
spend the night reading of you and Hope.  I made a record trip from
Salonica.  By leaving the second steamer at Messina and taking an
eighteen-hour trip across Italy I saved ten hours.  But when I got here
I found the French Consul had taken a holiday, AND WAS OUT BUYING
CHRISTMAS PRESENTS!  So, I could not get permission to enter France.
With some Red Cross Americans, I raged around the French Consulate, but
it was no use.  So I am here, and cannot leave UNTIL MIDNIGHT
CHRISTMAS.  When I found I could not get away, I told Cook's to give me
their rapid-fire guide, and I set out to SEE ROME.  The Manager of
Cook's was the same man who, 19 years ago, sold me tickets to the Greek
war in Florence, when the American Consulate was in the same building
with Cook's, and Charley was Consul.  So he gave me a great guide.  We
began at ten this morning and we stopped at six.  They say it takes
five years to see Rome, but when I let the rapid-fire guide escape, he
said he had to compliment me; we climbed more stairways and hills than
there are in all New York and Westchester County; and there is just one
idea in my mind, and that is that you and I must see this sacred place
together.  On all this trip I have wanted YOU, but NEVER so as today.
And I particularly inquired about the milk.  It is said to be
excellent.  So we will come here, and you, with all your love of what
is fine and beautiful, will be very happy, and Hope will learn Italian,
and to know what is best in art, and statues and churches.  I have seen
2900 churches, and all of them built by Michael Angelo and decorated by
Raphael; and it was so wonderful I cried.  I bought candles and
prayers, and I am afraid Christian Science had a dull day.  Tomorrow we
start at nine, and go to high mass at St. Peter's, and then into the
country to the catacombs, where the early Christians hid from the
Romans.  It is not what you would call an English Christmas, but it is
so beautiful and wonderful that you BOTH ARE VERY NEAR.

I sent you a cable, the second one, because it is not sure they are
forwarded, and I hung up a stocking for Hope.  One of the peasant women
made in Salonica.  I am bringing it with me.  And the cat is on my
window--still looking out on the Romans.  The green leaf I got in the
forum, where Mark Antony made his speech over Caesar's body.  It is the
plant that gave Pericles the idea of the Corinthian column.  You
remember.  It was growing under a tile some one had laid over it--and
the yellow flower was on my table at dinner, so I send it, that we may
know on Christmas Eve we dined together.

Good-night, now, and God bless you.  I am off to bed now, in a bed with
sheets.  The first in six days.  How I LOVE you, and LOVE you.  Such
good wishes I send you, and such love to you both.  May the good Lord
bless you as he has blessed me--with the best of women, with the best
of daughters.  I am a proud husband and a proud father; and soon I will
be a HAPPY husband and a HAPPY father.

Good-night, dear heart.

RICHARD.


PARIS, December 28th, 1915.

DEAR OLD MAN:

Hurrah for the Dictator!  He has been a great good friend to me.  I
will know to-day about whether I can go back to the French front.  If
not I will try the Belgians and then London, and home.  I spent
Christmas day in Rome in the catacombs.  I could not wear my heart upon
my sleeve for duchesses to peck at.  It is just as you say, Dad and
Mother made the day so dear and beautiful.  I did not know how glad I
would be to be back here for while the trip East led to no news value,
to me personally it was interesting.  But I am terribly tired after the
last nine days, sleeping on sofas, decks, a different deck each night
and writing all the time and such poor stuff.  But, oh! when I saw
Paris I knew how glad I was!  WHAT a beautiful place, what a kind
courteous people.  We will all be here some day.  Tell Dai she must be
my interpreter.  All love to her, and you, and good luck to the
syndicate.  YOUR syndicate.  I have not heard from mine for six weeks.
They have not sent me a single clipping of anything, so I don't know
whether anything got through or not, and I have nothing to show these
people here that might encourage them to send me out again.  They
certainly have made it hard hoeing.  Tell Guvey his letter about the
toys was a great success here, and copied into several papers.

Goodbye, and God bless you, and good luck to you.

DICK.


PARIS, December 31st, 1915.

DEAR OLD MAN:

To wish you and Dai a Happy New Year.  It will mean a lot to us when we
can get together, and take it together, good and bad.  I am awfully
pleased over the novel coming out by the Harper's and, in landing so
much for me out of The Dictator.  You have started the New Year for me
splendidly.  I expect I will be back around the first of February.  I
am now trying to "get back," but, I need more time.  I can only put the
trip down to the wrong side of the ledger.  Personally, I got a lot out
of it, but I am not sent over here to improve my knowledge of Europe,
but to furnish news and stories and that has not happened.

I am constantly running against folks who knew you in Florence, and I
regret to say most of them are in business at the Chatham bar.  What a
story they make; the M----'s and the like, who know Paris only from the
cocktail side.  One of our attaches told me to-day he had been lunching
for the last 18 months at the grill room of the Chatham, where the
"mixed grill" was as good as in New York.  He had no knowledge of any
other place to eat.  The Hotel de l'Empire is a terrible tragedy.  They
are so poor, that I believe it is my eight francs a day keeps them
going; nothing else is in sight.  But, it is the exception.  Never did
a people take a war as the French take this worst of all wars.  They
really are the most splendid of people.  I only wish I could have had
one of them for a grandfather or grandmother.  Bessie writes that Hope
is growing wonderfully and beautifully, and I am sick for a sight of
her, and for you.  Good night and God bless you and the happiest of New
Years to you both.

Your loving brother,

DICK.


These postcards are "originals" painted by students of the Beaux-Arts
to keep alive, and to keep those students in the trenches.  They are
for Dai.


PARIS, December 31, 1915.

DEAREST ONE:

The old year, the dear, old year that brought us Hope, is very near the
end.  I am not going to watch him go.  I have drunk to the New Year and
to my wife and daughter, and before there is "a new step on the floor,
and a new face at the door," I will be asleep.  Of all my many years,
the old year, that is so soon to pass away, has been the best, for it
has brought you to me with a closer tie, has added to the love I have
for every breath you breathe, for your laugh and your smile, and deep
concern, that comes if you think your worthless husband is worried, or
cross, or dismayed.  Each year I love you more; for I know you more,
and to know more of the lovely soul you are, is to love more.  Just now
we are in a hard place.  I am sure you cannot comprehend how her
father, her "Dad" and your husband can keep away.  Neither do I
understand.

But, for both your sakes, I want, before I own up that this adventure
has been a failure, to try and pull something out of the wreck.  If the
government says I CAN, then I still may be able to do something.  If it
says, "NO," then it's Home, boys, Home, and that's where I want to be.
It's home, boys, home, in the old countree.  'Neath the ash, and the
oak, and the spreading maple tree, it's home, boys, home, to mine own
countree!  This is Hope and you.  So know, that in getting to you I
have not thrown away a minute.  I have been a slave-driver, to others
as well as to myself.  But you cannot get favors with a whip; and, the
French war office has other matters to occupy it, that it considers of
more importance than an impatient war correspondent.  So long as you
understand, it will not matter.  Nothing hurts, except that you may not
understand.  The moment I see you, and you see me, you will understand.
So, goodnight, and God bless you, you, my two blessings.  Here is to
our own year of 1915, your year and Hope's year, and, because I have
you both, my year.  I send you all the love in all the world.

RICHARD.


January 5, 1916.

MY DEAREST ONE:

WHAT PICTURES!  WHAT HAPPINESS!  What a proud Richard!  On top of my
writing yesterday that I had had no sketches of yours, and no kodaks of
Hope, eight came to-night, and oh!  I am so proud, so homesick.  What a
wonderful nurse and mother you are!  Was ever there anything so
lovable?  And that she should be ours, to hold and to love, and to make
happy.  These last eight days in Paris, in and out, have made me so
homesick for those I love, that you will never know what the delays
meant.  I felt just the way poor women feel who kidnap babies.  In the
parks I know the nurse-maids are afraid of me.  I stick my head under
the hoods of the baby carriages, and stop and stand watching them at
play.  And tonight when all these beautiful pictures came, I was the
happiest father anywhere.

The delay was no one's fault, not mine anyway, nor can I blame anyone.
These people are splendid.  They are willing to do anything for one,
but it takes time.  When they are fighting for their lives and have not
seen their own babies in a year, that you want to see yours is only
natural and to oblige you they can't see why they should upset the
whole war.  But now it looks less as though I would have to call it a
failure.  And Hope may be proud of me, and you may be proud of me, and
I will have enough ammunition to draw on for many articles and letters,
and another book.

It has been a cruel time; and when I tell you how I worked to get it
over, and to be back with you, you will understand many things.  The
most important of all will be how I love you.  Only wait until I can
lay eyes on you, you will just take one look and know that it couldn't
be helped, that the delay was the work of others, that, all I wanted
was my Bessie and my Hope.

How heavy she will be, if she is anything like the picture of her on
the coverlet, she is a prize baby.  And if she is anything like as
beautiful as in the baby carriage she is an angel straight from God.  I
want to sit in the green chair and have you on one knee and her majesty
on the other, and have her climb over me, and pull my hair and bang my
nose, and in time to know how I love you both.

Goodnight, dear heart, I wish you had had yourself in the picture.  I
have three in the summer time with you holding her and that is the way
I like to see you, that is the way I think of you.  I love you, and I
love her for making you so happy, and I love her for her sake, and
because she is OURS: and has tied us tighter and closer even than it
has ever been.  I love you so that I can't write about it, and I am
going to do nothing all spring but just sit around, and be in
everybody's way, watching you together.

How jealous I am of you, and homesick for you.  Of course, she knows
"mamma" is YOU; and to look at you when they ask, "Where's mother?"
Who else could be her mother BUT THE DEAREST WOMAN IN THE WORLD, and
the one who loves her so, and in so wonderful a way.  She is beautiful
beyond all things human I know.  If ever a woman deserved a beautiful
daughter, YOU DO, for you are the best of mothers, and you know how "to
care greatly."

Good-night, my precious, dear one, and God keep you, as He will, and
help me to keep you both happy.  What you give me you never will know.

RICHARD.




CHAPTER XX

THE LAST DAYS

After a short visit to London, Richard returned to New York in
February, 1916.  During his absence his wife and Hope had occupied the
Scribner cottage at Mount Kisco, about two miles from Crossroads.  Here
my brother finished his second book on the war, and wrote numerous
articles and letters urging the immediate necessity for preparedness in
this country.  As to Richard's usefulness to his country at this time,
I quote in part from two appreciations written after my brother's death
by the two most prominent exponents of preparedness.

Theodore Roosevelt said:

"He was as good an American as ever lived, and his heart flamed against
cruelty and injustice.  His writings form a text-book of Americanism
which all our people would do well to read at the present time."

Major-General Leonard Wood said:

"The death of Richard Harding Davis was a real loss to the movement for
preparedness.  Mr. Davis had an extensive experience as a military
observer, and thoroughly appreciated the need of a general training
system like that of Australia or Switzerland and of thorough
organization of our industrial resources in, order to establish a
condition of reasonable preparedness in this country.  A few days
before his death he came to Governors Island for the purpose of
ascertaining in what line of work he could be most useful in building
up sound public opinion in favor of such preparedness as would give us
a real peace insurance.  His mind was bent on devoting his energies and
abilities to the work of public education on this vitally important
subject, and few men were better qualified to do so, for he had served
as a military observer in many campaigns.

"Throughout the Cuban campaign he was attached to the headquarters of
my regiment in Cuba as a military observer.  He was with the advanced
party at the opening of the fight at Las Guasiinas, and was
distinguished throughout the fight by coolness and good conduct.  He
also participated in the battle of San Juan and the siege of Santiago,
and as an observer was always where duty called him.  He was a
delightful companion, cheerful, resourceful, and thoughtful of the
interests and wishes of others.  His reports of the game were valuable
and among the best and most accurate.

"The Plattsburg movement took a very strong hold of him.  He saw in
this a great instrument for building up a sound knowledge concerning
our military history and policy, also a very practical way of training
men for the duties of junior officers.  He realized fully that we
should need in case of war tens of thousands of officers with our newly
raised troops, and that it would be utterly impossible to prepare them
in the hurry and confusion of the onrush of modern war.  His heart was
filled with a desire to serve his country to the best of his ability.
His recent experience in Europe pointed out to him the absolute madness
of longer disregarding the need of doing those things which reasonable
preparedness dictates, the things which cannot be accomplished after
trouble is upon us.  He had in mind at the time of his death a series
of articles to be written especially to build up interest in universal
military training through conveying to our people an understanding of
what organization as it exists to-day means, and how vitally important
it is for our people to do in time of peace those things which modern
war does not permit done once it is under way.

"Davis was a loyal friend, a thoroughgoing American devoted to the best
interests of his country, courageous, sympathetic, and true.  His loss
has been a very real one to all of us who knew and appreciated him, and
in his death the cause of preparedness has lost an able worker and the
country a devoted and loyal citizen."

Although suffering from his strenuous experiences in France, and more
particularly from those in Greece, Richard continued to accomplish his
usual enormous amount of work, and during these weeks wrote his last
short story, "The Deserter."

The following letter was written to me while I was in the Bahamas and
was in reference to a novel which I had dedicated to Hope:


MOUNT KISCO--February 28, 1916.

DEAR OLD MAN:

No word yet of the book, except the advts. I enclose.  I will send you
the notices as soon as they begin to appear.  I am so happy over the
dedication, and, very proud.  So, Hope will be when she knows.  As I
have not read the novel it all will come as a splendid and pleasant
surprise.  I am looking forward to sitting down to it with all the
pleasure in the world.

You chose the right moment to elope.  Never was weather so cold, cruel
and bitter.  Hope is the only one who goes out of doors.

I start the fires in the Big House tomorrow and the plumbers and paper
hangers, painters enter the day after.

The attack on Verdun makes me sick.  I was there six weeks ago in one
of the forts but of course could not then nor can I now write of it.  I
don't believe the drive ever can get through.  For two reasons, and the
unmilitary one is that I believe in a just God.  Give my love to Dai,
and for you always

DICK.

P. S. I am happy you are both so happy, but those post cards with the
palms were cruelty to animals.


On the 21st of March, 1916, Richard and his wife and daughter moved
from the Scribner cottage to Crossroads, and a few days later he was
attacked by the illness that ended in his death on April 11.  He had
dined with his wife and afterward had worked on an article on
preparedness, written some letters and telegrams concerning the same
subject and, while repeating one of the latter over the telephone, was
stricken.  Within a week of his fifty-third year, just one year from
the day he had first brought his baby daughter to her real home, doing
the best and finest work of his career in the cause of the Allies and
preparedness, quite unconscious that the end was near, he left us.  In
those fifty-two years he had crowded the work, the pleasures, the kind,
chivalrous deeds of many men, and he died just as I am sure he would
have wished to die, working into the night for a great cause, and
although ill and tired, still fretful for the morning that he might
again take up the fight.













SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE


BY

RICHARD HARDING DAVIS




  TO
  IRENE AND DANA GIBSON




SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE



I

"It is so good of you to come early," said Mrs. Porter, as Alice
Langham entered the drawing-room.  "I want to ask a favor of you.  I'm
sure you won't mind.  I would ask one of the debutantes, except that
they're always so cross if one puts them next to men they don't know
and who can't help them, and so I thought I'd just ask you, you're so
good-natured.  You don't mind, do you?"

"I mind being called good-natured," said Miss Langham, smiling. "Mind
what, Mrs. Porter?" she asked.

"He is a friend of George's," Mrs. Porter explained, vaguely. "He's a
cowboy.  It seems he was very civil to George when he was out there
shooting in New Mexico, or Old Mexico, I don't remember which.  He took
George to his hut and gave him things to shoot, and all that, and now
he is in New York with a letter of introduction.  It's just like
George.  He may be a most impossible sort of man, but, as I said to Mr.
Porter, the people I've asked can't complain, because I don't know
anything more about him than they do.  He called to-day when I was out
and left his card and George's letter of introduction, and as a man had
failed me for to-night, I just thought I would kill two birds with one
stone, and ask him to fill his place, and he's here. And, oh, yes,"
Mrs. Porter added, "I'm going to put him next to you, do you mind?"

"Unless he wears leather leggings and long spurs I shall mind very
much," said Miss Langham.

"Well, that's very nice of you," purred Mrs. Porter, as she moved away.
"He may not be so bad, after all; and I'll put Reginald King on your
other side, shall I?" she asked, pausing and glancing back.

The look on Miss Langham's face, which had been one of amusement,
changed consciously, and she smiled with polite acquiescence.

"As you please, Mrs. Porter," she answered.  She raised her eyebrows
slightly.  "I am, as the politicians say, 'in the hands of my friends.'"

"Entirely too much in the hands of my friends," she repeated, as she
turned away.  This was the twelfth time during that same winter that
she and Mr. King had been placed next to one another at dinner, and it
had passed beyond the point when she could say that it did not matter
what people thought as long as she and he understood.  It had now
reached that stage when she was not quite sure that she understood
either him or herself.  They had known each other for a very long time;
too long, she sometimes thought, for them ever to grow to know each
other any better. But there was always the chance that he had another
side, one that had not disclosed itself, and which she could not
discover in the strict social environment in which they both lived.
And she was the surer of this because she had once seen him when he did
not know that she was near, and he had been so different that it had
puzzled her and made her wonder if she knew the real Reggie King at all.

It was at a dance at a studio, and some French pantomimists gave a
little play.  When it was over, King sat in the corner talking to one
of the Frenchwomen, and while he waited on her he was laughing at her
and at her efforts to speak English.  He was telling her how to say
certain phrases and not telling her correctly, and she suspected this
and was accusing him of it, and they were rhapsodizing and exclaiming
over certain delightful places and dishes of which they both knew in
Paris with the enthusiasm of two children.  Miss Langham saw him off
his guard for the first time and instead of a somewhat bored and clever
man of the world, he appeared as sincere and interested as a boy.

When he joined her, later, the same evening, he was as entertaining as
usual, and as polite and attentive as he had been to the Frenchwoman,
but he was not greatly interested, and his laugh was modulated and not
spontaneous.  She had wondered that night, and frequently since then,
if, in the event of his asking her to marry him, which was possible,
and of her accepting him, which was also possible, whether she would
find him, in the closer knowledge of married life, as keen and
lighthearted with her as he had been with the French dancer.  If he
would but treat her more like a comrade and equal, and less like a
prime minister conferring with his queen!  She wanted something more
intimate than the deference that he showed her, and she did not like
his taking it as an accepted fact that she was as worldly-wise as
himself, even though it were true.

She was a woman and wanted to be loved, in spite of the fact that she
had been loved by many men--at least it was so supposed--and had
rejected them.

Each had offered her position, or had wanted her because she was fitted
to match his own great state, or because he was ambitious, or because
she was rich.  The man who could love her as she once believed men
could love, and who could give her something else besides approval of
her beauty and her mind, had not disclosed himself.  She had begun to
think that he never would, that he did not exist, that he was an
imagination of the playhouse and the novel.  The men whom she knew were
careful to show her that they appreciated how distinguished was her
position, and how inaccessible she was to them.  They seemed to think
that by so humbling themselves, and by emphasizing her position they
pleased her best, when it was what she wanted them to forget.  Each of
them would draw away backward, bowing and protesting that he was
unworthy to raise his eyes to such a prize, but that if she would only
stoop to him, how happy his life would be.  Sometimes they meant it
sincerely; sometimes they were gentlemanly adventurers of title, from
whom it was a business proposition, and in either case she turned
restlessly away and asked herself how long it would be before the man
would come who would pick her up on his saddle and gallop off with her,
with his arm around her waist and his horse's hoofs clattering beneath
them, and echoing the tumult in their hearts.

She had known too many great people in the world to feel impressed with
her own position at home in America; but she sometimes compared herself
to the Queen in "In a Balcony," and repeated to herself, with mock
seriousness:--

    "And you the marble statue all the time
      They praise and point at as preferred to life,
      Yet leave for the first breathing woman's cheek,
      First dancer's, gypsy's or street balladine's!"

And if it were true, she asked herself, that the man she had imagined
was only an ideal and an illusion, was not King the best of the others,
the unideal and ever-present others?  Every one else seemed to think
so.  The society they knew put them constantly together and approved.
Her people approved.  Her own mind approved, and as her heart was not
apparently ever to be considered, who could say that it did not approve
as well?  He was certainly a very charming fellow, a manly, clever
companion, and one who bore about him the evidences of distinction and
thorough breeding.  As far as family went, the Kings were as old as a
young country could expect, and Reggie King was, moreover, in spite of
his wealth, a man of action and ability.  His yacht journeyed from
continent to continent, and not merely up the Sound to Newport, and he
was as well known and welcome to the consuls along the coasts of Africa
and South America as he was at Cowes or Nice.  His books of voyages
were recognized by geographical societies and other serious bodies, who
had given him permission to put long disarrangements of the alphabet
after his name.  She liked him because she had grown to be at home with
him, because it was good to know that there was some one who would not
misunderstand her, and who, should she so indulge herself, would not
take advantage of any appeal she might make to his sympathy, who would
always be sure to do the tactful thing and the courteous thing, and
who, while he might never do a great thing, could not do an unkind one.

Miss Langham had entered the Porters' drawing-room after the greater
number of the guests had arrived, and she turned from her hostess to
listen to an old gentleman with a passion for golf, a passion in which
he had for a long time been endeavoring to interest her.  She answered
him and his enthusiasm in kind, and with as much apparent interest as
she would have shown in a matter of state.  It was her principle to be
all things to all men, whether they were great artists, great
diplomats, or great bores.  If a man had been pleading with her to
leave the conservatory and run away with him, and another had come up
innocently and announced that it was his dance, she would have said:
"Oh, is it?" with as much apparent delight as though his coming had
been the one bright hope in her life.

She was growing enthusiastic over the delights of golf and
unconsciously making a very beautiful picture of herself in her
interest and forced vivacity, when she became conscious for the first
time of a strange young man who was standing alone before the fireplace
looking at her, and frankly listening to all the nonsense she was
talking.  She guessed that he had been listening for some time, and she
also saw, before he turned his eyes quickly away, that he was
distinctly amused.  Miss Langham stopped gesticulating and lowered her
voice, but continued to keep her eyes on the face of the stranger,
whose own eyes were wandering around the room, to give her, so she
guessed, the idea that he had not been listening, but that she had
caught him at it in the moment he had first looked at her.  He was a
tall, broad-shouldered youth, with a handsome face, tanned and dyed,
either by the sun or by exposure to the wind, to a deep ruddy brown,
which contrasted strangely with his yellow hair and mustache, and with
the pallor of the other faces about him.  He was a stranger apparently
to every one present, and his bearing suggested, in consequence, that
ease of manner which comes to a person who is not only sure of himself,
but who has no knowledge of the claims and pretensions to social
distinction of those about him.  His most attractive feature was his
eyes, which seemed to observe all that was going on, not only what was
on the surface, but beneath the surface, and that not rudely or
covertly but with the frank, quick look of the trained observer.  Miss
Langham found it an interesting face to watch, and she did not look
away from it. She was acquainted with every one else in the room, and
hence she knew this must be the cowboy of whom Mrs. Porter had spoken,
and she wondered how any one who had lived the rough life of the West
could still retain the look when in formal clothes of one who was in
the habit of doing informal things in them.

Mrs. Porter presented her cowboy simply as "Mr. Clay, of whom I spoke
to you," with a significant raising of the eyebrows, and the cowboy
made way for King, who took Miss Langham in.  He looked frankly
pleased, however, when he found himself next to her again, but did not
take advantage of it throughout the first part of the dinner, during
which time he talked to the young married woman on his right, and Miss
Langham and King continued where they had left off at their last
meeting.  They knew each other well enough to joke of the way in which
they were thrown into each other's society, and, as she said, they
tried to make the best of it.  But while she spoke, Miss Langham was
continually conscious of the presence of her neighbor, who piqued her
interest and her curiosity in different ways.  He seemed to be at his
ease, and yet from the manner in which he glanced up and down the table
and listened to snatches of talk on either side of him he had the
appearance of one to whom it was all new, and who was seeing it for the
first time.

There was a jolly group at one end of the long table, and they wished
to emphasize the fact by laughing a little more hysterically at their
remarks than the humor of those witticisms seemed to justify.  A
daughter-in-law of Mrs. Porter was their leader in this, and at one
point she stopped in the middle of a story and waving her hand at the
double row of faces turned in her direction, which had been attracted
by the loudness of her voice, cried, gayly, "Don't listen.  This is for
private circulation.  It is not a jeune-fille story."  The debutantes
at the table continued talking again in steady, even tones, as though
they had not heard the remark or the first of the story, and the men
next to them appeared equally unconscious.  But the cowboy, Miss
Langham noted out of the corner of her eye, after a look of polite
surprise, beamed with amusement and continued to stare up and down the
table as though he had discovered a new trait in a peculiar and
interesting animal.  For some reason, she could not tell why, she felt
annoyed with herself and with her friends, and resented the attitude
which the new-comer assumed toward them.

"Mrs. Porter tells me that you know her son George?" she said. He did
not answer her at once, but bowed his head in assent, with a look of
interrogation, as though, so it seemed to her, he had expected her,
when she did speak, to say something less conventional.

"Yes," he replied, after a pause, "he joined us at Ayutla.  It was the
terminus of the Jalisco and Mexican Railroad then.  He came out over
the road and went in from there with an outfit after mountain lions.  I
believe he had very good sport."

"That is a very wonderful road, I am told," said King, bending forward
and introducing himself into the conversation with a nod of the head
toward Clay; "quite a remarkable feat of engineering."

"It will open up the country, I believe," assented the other,
indifferently.

"I know something of it," continued King, "because I met the men who
were putting it through at Pariqua, when we touched there in the yacht.
They shipped most of their plant to that port, and we saw a good deal
of them.  They were a very jolly lot, and they gave me a most
interesting account of their work and its difficulties."

Clay was looking at the other closely, as though he was trying to find
something back of what he was saying, but as his glance seemed only to
embarrass King he smiled freely again in assent, and gave him his full
attention.

"There are no men to-day, Miss Langham," King exclaimed, suddenly,
turning toward her, "to my mind, who lead as picturesque lives as do
civil engineers.  And there are no men whose work is as little
appreciated."

"Really?" said Miss Langham, encouragingly.

"Now those men I met," continued King, settling himself with his side
to the table, "were all young fellows of thirty or thereabouts, but
they were leading the lives of pioneers and martyrs--at least that's
what I'd call it.  They were marching through an almost unknown part of
Mexico, fighting Nature at every step and carrying civilization with
them.  They were doing better work than soldiers, because soldiers
destroy things, and these chaps were creating, and making the way
straight.  They had no banners either, nor brass bands.  They fought
mountains and rivers, and they were attacked on every side by fever and
the lack of food and severe exposure.  They had to sit down around a
camp-fire at night and calculate whether they were to tunnel a
mountain, or turn the bed of a river or bridge it.  And they knew all
the time that whatever they decided to do out there in the wilderness
meant thousands of dollars to the stockholders somewhere up in God's
country, who would some day hold them to account for them.  They
dragged their chains through miles and miles of jungle, and over flat
alkali beds and cactus, and they reared bridges across roaring canons.
We know nothing about them and we care less.  When their work is done
we ride over the road in an observation-car and look down thousands and
thousands of feet into the depths they have bridged, and we never give
them a thought.  They are the bravest soldiers of the present day, and
they are the least recognized.  I have forgotten their names, and you
never heard them.  But it seems to me the civil engineer, for all that,
is the chief civilizer of our century."

Miss Langham was looking ahead of her with her eyes half-closed, as
though she were going over in her mind the situation King had described.

"I never thought of that," she said.  "It sounds very fine. As you say,
the reward is so inglorious.  But that is what makes it fine."

The cowboy was looking down at the table and pulling at a flower in the
centre-piece.  He had ceased to smile.  Miss Langham turned on him
somewhat sharply, resenting his silence, and said, with a slight
challenge in her voice:--

"Do you agree, Mr. Clay," she asked, "or do you prefer the
chocolate-cream soldiers, in red coats and gold lace?"

"Oh, I don't know," the young man answered, with some slight
hesitation.  "It's a trade for each of them.  The engineer's work is
all the more absorbing, I imagine, when the difficulties are greatest.
He has the fun of overcoming them."

"You see nothing in it then," she asked, "but a source of amusement?"

"Oh, yes, a good deal more," he replied.  "A livelihood, for one thing.
I--I have been an engineer all my life.  I built that road Mr. King is
talking about."


An hour later, when Mrs. Porter made the move to go, Miss Langham rose
with a protesting sigh.  "I am so sorry," she said, "it has been most
interesting.  I never met two men who had visited so many inaccessible
places and come out whole.  You have quite inspired Mr. King, he was
never so amusing.  But I should like to hear the end of that adventure;
won't you tell it to me in the other room?"

Clay bowed.  "If I haven't thought of something more interesting in the
meantime," he said.

"What I can't understand," said King, as he moved up into Miss
Langham's place, "is how you had time to learn so much of the rest of
the world.  You don't act like a man who had spent his life in the
brush."

"How do you mean?" asked Clay, smiling--"that I don't use the wrong
forks?"

"No," laughed King, "but you told us that this was your first visit
East, and yet you're talking about England and Vienna and Voisin's.
How is it you've been there, while you have never been in New York?"

"Well, that's partly due to accident and partly to design," Clay
answered.  "You see I've worked for English and German and French
companies, as well as for those in the States, and I go abroad to make
reports and to receive instructions.  And then I'm what you call a
self-made man; that is, I've never been to college.  I've always had to
educate myself, and whenever I did get a holiday it seemed to me that I
ought to put it to the best advantage, and to spend it where
civilization was the furthest advanced--advanced, at least, in years.
When I settle down and become an expert, and demand large sums for just
looking at the work other fellows have done, then I hope to live in New
York, but until then I go where the art galleries are biggest and where
they have got the science of enjoying themselves down to the very
finest point.  I have enough rough work eight months of the year to
make me appreciate that.  So whenever I get a few months to myself I
take the Royal Mail to London, and from there to Paris or Vienna.  I
think I like Vienna the best.  The directors are generally important
people in their own cities, and they ask one about, and so, though I
hope I am a good American, it happens that I've more friends on the
Continent than in the United States."

"And how does this strike you?" asked King, with a movement of his
shoulder toward the men about the dismantled table.

"Oh, I don't know," laughed Clay.  "You've lived abroad yourself; how
does it strike you?"

Clay was the first man to enter the drawing-room.  He walked directly
away from the others and over to Miss Langham, and, taking her fan out
of her hands as though to assure himself of some hold upon her, seated
himself with his back to every one else.

"You have come to finish that story?" she said, smiling.

Miss Langham was a careful young person, and would not have encouraged
a man she knew even as well as she knew King, to talk to her through
dinner, and after it as well.  She fully recognized that because she
was conspicuous certain innocent pleasures were denied her which other
girls could enjoy without attracting attention or comment.  But Clay
interested her beyond her usual self, and the look in his eyes was a
tribute which she had no wish to put away from her.

"I've thought of something more interesting to talk about," said Clay.
"I'm going to talk about you.  You see I've known you a long time."

"Since eight o'clock?" asked Miss Langham.

"Oh, no, since your coming out, four years ago."

"It's not polite to remember so far back," she said.  "Were you one of
those who assisted at that important function?  There were so many
there I don't remember."

"No, I only read about it.  I remember it very well; I had ridden over
twelve miles for the mail that day, and I stopped half-way back to the
ranch and camped out in the shade of a rock and read all the papers and
magazines through at one sitting, until the sun went down and I
couldn't see the print.  One of the papers had an account of your
coming out in it, and a picture of you, and I wrote East to the
photographer for the original.  It knocked about the West for three
months and then reached me at Laredo, on the border between Texas and
Mexico, and I have had it with me ever since."

Miss Langham looked at Clay for a moment in silent dismay and with a
perplexed smile.

"Where is it now?" she asked at last.

"In my trunk at the hotel."

"Oh," she said, slowly.  She was still in doubt as to how to treat this
act of unconventionality.  "Not in your watch?" she said, to cover up
the pause.  "That would have been more in keeping with the rest of the
story."

The young man smiled grimly, and pulling out his watch pried back the
lid and turned it to her so that she could see a photograph inside.
The face in the watch was that of a young girl in the dress of a
fashion of several years ago.  It was a lovely, frank face, looking out
of the picture into the world kindly and questioningly, and without
fear.

"Was I once like that?" she said, lightly.  "Well, go on."

"Well," he said, with a little sigh of relief, "I became greatly
interested in Miss Alice Langham, and in her comings out and goings in,
and in her gowns.  Thanks to our having a press in the States that
makes a specialty of personalities, I was able to follow you pretty
closely, for, wherever I go, I have my papers sent after me.  I can get
along without a compass or a medicine-chest, but I can't do without the
newspapers and the magazines. There was a time when I thought you were
going to marry that Austrian chap, and I didn't approve of that.  I
knew things about him in Vienna.  And then I read of your engagement to
others--well--several others; some of them I thought worthy, and others
not.  Once I even thought of writing you about it, and once I saw you
in Paris.  You were passing on a coach.  The man with me told me it was
you, and I wanted to follow the coach in a fiacre, but he said he knew
at what hotel you were stopping, and so I let you go, but you were not
at that hotel, or at any other--at least, I couldn't find you."

"What would you have done--?" asked Miss Langham.  "Never mind," she
interrupted, "go on."

"Well, that's all," said Clay, smiling.  "That's all, at least, that
concerns you.  That is the romance of this poor young man."

"But not the only one," she said, for the sake of saying something.

"Perhaps not," answered Clay, "but the only one that counts. I always
knew I was going to meet you some day.  And now I have met you."

"Well, and now that you have met me," said Miss Langham, looking at him
in some amusement, "are you sorry?"

"No--" said Clay, but so slowly and with such consideration that Miss
Langham laughed and held her head a little higher. "Not sorry to meet
you, but to meet you in such surroundings."

"What fault do you find with my surroundings?"

"Well, these people," answered Clay, "they are so foolish, so futile.
You shouldn't be here.  There must be something else better than this.
You can't make me believe that you choose it. In Europe you could have
a salon, or you could influence statesmen.  There surely must be
something here for you to turn to as well.  Something better than
golf-sticks and salted almonds."

"What do you know of me?" said Miss Langham, steadily.  "Only what you
have read of me in impertinent paragraphs.  How do you know I am fitted
for anything else but just this?  You never spoke with me before
to-night."

"That has nothing to do with it," said Clay, quickly.  "Time is made
for ordinary people.  When people who amount to anything meet they
don't have to waste months in finding each other out. It is only the
doubtful ones who have to be tested again and again.  When I was a kid
in the diamond mines in Kimberley, I have seen the experts pick out a
perfect diamond from the heap at the first glance, and without a
moment's hesitation.  It was the cheap stones they spent most of the
afternoon over.  Suppose I HAVE only seen you to-night for the first
time; suppose I shall not see you again, which is quite likely, for I
sail tomorrow for South America--what of that?  I am just as sure of
what you are as though I had known you for years."

Miss Langham looked at him for a moment in silence.  Her beauty was so
great that she could take her time to speak.  She was not afraid of
losing any one's attention.

"And have you come out of the West, knowing me so well, just to tell me
that I am wasting myself?" she said.  "Is that all?"

"That is all," answered Clay.  "You know the things I would like to
tell you," he added, looking at her closely.

"I think I like to be told the other things best," she said, "they are
the easier to believe."

"You have to believe whatever I tell you," said Clay, smiling. The girl
pressed her hands together in her lap, and looked at him curiously.
The people about them were moving and making their farewells, and they
brought her back to the present with a start.

"I'm sorry you're going away," she said.  "It has been so odd. You come
suddenly up out of the wilderness, and set me to thinking and try to
trouble me with questions about myself, and then steal away again
without stopping to help me to settle them. Is it fair?"  She rose and
put out her hand, and he took it and held it for a moment, while they
stood looking at one another.

"I am coming back," he said, "and I will find that you have settled
them for yourself."

"Good-by," she said, in so low a tone that the people standing near
them could not hear.  "You haven't asked me for it, you know, but--I
think I shall let you keep that picture."


"Thank you," said Clay, smiling, "I meant to."

"You can keep it," she continued, turning back, "because it is not my
picture.  It is a picture of a girl who ceased to exist four years ago,
and whom you have never met.  Good-night."

Mr. Langham and Hope, his younger daughter, had been to the theatre.
The performance had been one which delighted Miss Hope, and which
satisfied her father because he loved to hear her laugh.  Mr. Langham
was the slave of his own good fortune.  By instinct and education he
was a man of leisure and culture, but the wealth he had inherited was
like an unruly child that needed his constant watching, and in keeping
it well in hand he had become a man of business, with time for nothing
else.

Alice Langham, on her return from Mrs. Porter's dinner, found him in
his study engaged with a game of solitaire, while Hope was kneeling on
a chair beside him with her elbows on the table. Mr. Langham had been
troubled with insomnia of late, and so it often happened that when
Alice returned from a ball she would find him sitting with a novel, or
his game of solitaire, and Hope, who had crept downstairs from her bed,
dozing in front of the open fire and keeping him silent company.  The
father and the younger daughter were very close to one another, and had
grown especially so since his wife had died and his son and heir had
gone to college.  This fourth member of the family was a great bond of
sympathy and interest between them, and his triumphs and escapades at
Yale were the chief subjects of their conversation. It was told by the
directors of a great Western railroad, who had come to New York to
discuss an important question with Mr. Langham, that they had been
ushered downstairs one night into his basement, where they had found
the President of the Board and his daughter Hope working out a game of
football on the billiard table.  They had chalked it off into what
corresponded to five-yard lines, and they were hurling twenty-two
chess-men across it in "flying wedges" and practising the several
tricks which young Langham had intrusted to his sister under an oath of
secrecy.  The sight filled the directors with the horrible fear that
business troubles had turned the President's mind, but after they had
sat for half an hour perched on the high chairs around the table, while
Hope excitedly explained the game to them, they decided that he was
wiser than they knew, and each left the house regretting he had no son
worthy enough to bring "that young girl" into the Far West.

"You are home early," said Mr. Langham, as Alice stood above him
pulling at her gloves.  "I thought you said you were going on to some
dance."

"I was tired," his daughter answered.

"Well, when I'm out," commented Hope, "I won't come home at eleven
o'clock.  Alice always was a quitter."

"A what?" asked the older sister.

"Tell us what you had for dinner," said Hope.  "I know it isn't nice to
ask," she added, hastily, "but I always like to know."

"I don't remember," Miss Langham answered, smiling at her father,
"except that he was very much sunburned and had most perplexing eyes."

"Oh, of course," assented Hope, "I suppose you mean by that that you
talked with some man all through dinner.  Well, I think there is a time
for everything."

"Father," interrupted Miss Langham, "do you know many engineers--I mean
do you come in contact with them through the railroads and mines you
have an interest in?  I am rather curious about them," she said,
lightly.  "They seem to be a most picturesque lot of young men."

"Engineers?  Of course," said Mr. Langham, vaguely, with the ten of
spades held doubtfully in air.  "Sometimes we have to depend upon them
altogether.  We decide from what the engineering experts tell us
whether we will invest in a thing or not."

"I don't think I mean the big men of the profession," said his
daughter, doubtfully.  "I mean those who do the rough work.  The men
who dig the mines and lay out the railroads.  Do you know any of them?"

"Some of them," said Mr. Langham, leaning back and shuffling the cards
for a new game.  "Why?"

"Did you ever hear of a Mr. Robert Clay?"

Mr. Langham smiled as he placed the cards one above the other in even
rows.  "Very often," he said.  "He sails to-morrow to open up the
largest iron deposits in South America.  He goes for the Valencia
Mining Company.  Valencia is the capital of Olancho, one of those
little republics down there."

"Do you--are you interested in that company?" asked Miss Langham,
seating herself before the fire and holding out her hands toward it.
"Does Mr. Clay know that you are?"

"Yes--I am interested in it," Mr. Langham replied, studying the cards
before him, "but I don't think Clay knows it--nobody knows it yet,
except the president and the other officers."  He lifted a card and put
it down again in some indecision.  "It's generally supposed to be
operated by a company, but all the stock is owned by one man.  As a
matter of fact, my dear children," exclaimed Mr. Langham, as he placed
a deuce of clubs upon a deuce of spades with a smile of content, "the
Valencia Mining Company is your beloved father."

"Oh," said Miss Langham, as she looked steadily into the fire.

Hope tapped her lips gently with the back of her hand to hide the fact
that she was sleepy, and nudged her father's elbow.  "You shouldn't
have put the deuce there," she said, "you should have used it to build
with on the ace."



II

A year before Mrs. Porter's dinner a tramp steamer on her way to the
capital of Brazil had steered so close to the shores of Olancho that
her solitary passenger could look into the caverns the waves had
tunnelled in the limestone cliffs along the coast. The solitary
passenger was Robert Clay, and he made a guess that the white palisades
which fringed the base of the mountains along the shore had been forced
up above the level of the sea many years before by some volcanic
action.  Olancho, as many people know, is situated on the northeastern
coast of South America, and its shores are washed by the main
equatorial current.  From the deck of a passing vessel you can obtain
but little idea of Olancho or of the abundance and tropical beauty
which lies hidden away behind the rampart of mountains on her shore.
You can see only their desolate dark-green front, and the white caves
at their base, into which the waves rush with an echoing roar, and in
and out of which fly continually thousands of frightened bats.

The mining engineer on the rail of the tramp steamer observed this
peculiar formation of the coast with listless interest, until he noted,
when the vessel stood some thirty miles north of the harbor of
Valencia, that the limestone formation had disappeared, and that the
waves now beat against the base of the mountains themselves.  There
were five of these mountains which jutted out into the ocean, and they
suggested roughly the five knuckles of a giant hand clenched and lying
flat upon the surface of the water.  They extended for seven miles, and
then the caverns in the palisades began again and continued on down the
coast to the great cliffs that guard the harbor of Olancho's capital.

"The waves tunnelled their way easily enough until they ran up against
those five mountains," mused the engineer, "and then they had to fall
back."  He walked to the captain's cabin and asked to look at a map of
the coast line.  "I believe I won't go to Rio," he said later in the
day; "I think I will drop off here at Valencia."

So he left the tramp steamer at that place and disappeared into the
interior with an ox-cart and a couple of pack-mules, and returned to
write a lengthy letter from the Consul's office to a Mr. Langham in the
United States, knowing he was largely interested in mines and in
mining.  "There are five mountains filled with ore," Clay wrote, "which
should be extracted by open-faced workings.  I saw great masses of red
hematite lying exposed on the side of the mountain, only waiting a pick
and shovel, and at one place there were five thousand tons in plain
sight.  I should call the stuff first-class Bessemer ore, running about
sixty-three per cent metallic iron.  The people know it is there, but
have no knowledge of its value, and are too lazy to ever work it
themselves.  As to transportation, it would only be necessary to run a
freight railroad twenty miles along the sea-coast to the harbor of
Valencia and dump your ore from your own pier into your own vessels.
It would not, I think, be possible to ship direct from the mines
themselves, even though, as I say, the ore runs right down into the
water, because there is no place at which it would be safe for a large
vessel to touch.  I will look into the political side of it and see
what sort of a concession I can get for you.  I should think ten per
cent of the output would satisfy them, and they would, of course, admit
machinery and plant free of duty."

Six months after this communication had arrived in New York City, the
Valencia Mining Company was formally incorporated, and a man named Van
Antwerp, with two hundred workmen and a half-dozen assistants, was sent
South to lay out the freight railroad, to erect the dumping-pier, and
to strip the five mountains of their forests and underbrush.  It was
not a task for a holiday, but a stern, difficult, and perplexing
problem, and Van Antwerp was not quite the man to solve it.  He was
stubborn, self-confident, and indifferent by turns.  He did not depend
upon his lieutenants, but jealously guarded his own opinions from the
least question or discussion, and at every step he antagonized the
easy-going people among whom he had come to work.  He had no patience
with their habits of procrastination, and he was continually offending
their lazy good-nature and their pride.  He treated the rich planters,
who owned the land between the mines and the harbor over which the
freight railroad must run, with as little consideration as he showed
the regiment of soldiers which the Government had farmed out to the
company to serve as laborers in the mines.  Six months after Van
Antwerp had taken charge at Valencia, Clay, who had finished the
railroad in Mexico, of which King had spoken, was asked by telegraph to
undertake the work of getting the ore out of the mountains he had
discovered, and shipping it North.  He accepted the offer and was given
the title of General Manager and Resident Director, and an enormous
salary, and was also given to understand that the rough work of
preparation had been accomplished, and that the more important service
of picking up the five mountains and putting them in fragments into
tramp steamers would continue under his direction.  He had a letter of
recall for Van Antwerp, and a letter of introduction to the Minister of
Mines and Agriculture.  Further than that he knew nothing of the work
before him, but he concluded, from the fact that he had been paid the
almost prohibitive sum he had asked for his services, that it must be
important, or that he had reached that place in his career when he
could stop actual work and live easily, as an expert, on the work of
others.

Clay rolled along the coast from Valencia to the mines in a
paddle-wheeled steamer that had served its usefulness on the
Mississippi, and which had been rotting at the levees in New Orleans,
when Van Antwerp had chartered it to carry tools and machinery to the
mines and to serve as a private launch for himself.  It was a choice
either of this steamer and landing in a small boat, or riding along the
line of the unfinished railroad on horseback.  Either route consumed
six valuable hours, and Clay, who was anxious to see his new field of
action, beat impatiently upon the rail of the rolling tub as it
wallowed in the sea.

He spent the first three days after his arrival at the mines in the
mountains, climbing them on foot and skirting their base on horseback,
and sleeping where night overtook him.  Van Antwerp did not accompany
him on his tour of inspection through the mines, but delegated that
duty to an engineer named MacWilliams, and to Weimer, the United States
Consul at Valencia, who had served the company in many ways and who was
in its closest confidence.

For three days the men toiled heavily over fallen trunks and trees,
slippery with the moss of centuries, or slid backward on the rolling
stones in the waterways, or clung to their ponies' backs to dodge the
hanging creepers.  At times for hours together they walked in single
file, bent nearly double, and seeing nothing before them but the
shining backs and shoulders of the negroes who hacked out the way for
them to go.  And again they would come suddenly upon a precipice, and
drink in the soft cool breath of the ocean, and look down thousands of
feet upon the impenetrable green under which they had been crawling,
out to where it met the sparkling surface of the Caribbean Sea.  It was
three days of unceasing activity while the sun shone, and of anxious
questionings around the camp-fire when the darkness fell, and when
there were no sounds on the mountain-side but that of falling water in
a distant ravine or the calls of the night-birds.

On the morning of the fourth day Clay and his attendants returned to
camp and rode to where the men had just begun to blast away the sloping
surface of the mountain.

As Clay passed between the zinc sheds and palm huts of the
soldier-workmen, they came running out to meet him, and one, who seemed
to be a leader, touched his bridle, and with his straw sombrero in his
hand begged for a word with el Senor the Director.

The news of Clay's return had reached the opening, and the throb of the
dummy-engines and the roar of the blasting ceased as the
assistant-engineers came down the valley to greet the new manager.
They found him seated on his horse gazing ahead of him, and listening
to the story of the soldier, whose fingers, as he spoke, trembled in
the air, with all the grace and passion of his Southern nature, while
back of him his companions stood humbly, in a silent chorus, with
eager, supplicating eyes.  Clay answered the man's speech curtly, with
a few short words, in the Spanish patois in which he had been
addressed, and then turned and smiled grimly upon the expectant group
of engineers.  He kept them waiting for some short space, while he
looked them over carefully, as though he had never seen them before.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, "I'm glad to have you here all together.  I
am only sorry you didn't come in time to hear what this fellow has had
to say.  I don't as a rule listen that long to complaints, but he told
me what I have seen for myself and what has been told me by others.  I
have been here three days now, and I assure you, gentlemen, that my
easiest course would be to pack up my things and go home on the next
steamer.  I was sent down here to take charge of a mine in active
operation, and I find--what?  I find that in six months you have done
almost nothing, and that the little you have condescended to do has
been done so badly that it will have to be done over again; that you
have not only wasted a half year of time--and I can't tell how much
money--but that you have succeeded in antagonizing all the people on
whose good-will we are absolutely dependent; you have allowed your
machinery to rust in the rain, and your workmen to rot with sickness.
You have not only done nothing, but you haven't a blue print to show me
what you meant to do.  I have never in my life come across laziness and
mismanagement and incompetency upon such a magnificent and reckless
scale.  You have not built the pier, you have not opened the freight
road, you have not taken out an ounce of ore.  You know more of
Valencia than you know of these mines; you know it from the Alameda to
the Canal.  You can tell me what night the band plays in the Plaza, but
you can't give me the elevation of one of these hills.  You have spent
your days on the pavements in front of cafs, and your nights in
dance-halls, and you have been drawing salaries every month.  I've more
respect for these half-breeds that you've allowed to starve in this
fever-bed than I have for you.  You have treated them worse than they'd
treat a dog, and if any of them die, it's on your heads.  You have put
them in a fever-camp which you have not even taken the trouble to
drain.  Your commissariat is rotten, and you have let them drink all
the rum they wanted.  There is not one of you--"

The group of silent men broke, and one of them stepped forward and
shook his forefinger at Clay.

"No man can talk to me like that," he said, warningly, "and think I'll
work under him.  I resign here and now."

"You what--" cried Clay, "you resign?"

He whirled his horse round with a dig of his spur and faced them.

"How dare you talk of resigning?  I'll pack the whole lot of you back
to New York on the first steamer, if I want to, and I'll give you such
characters that you'll be glad to get a job carrying a transit.  You're
in no position to talk of resigning yet--not one of you.  Yes," he
added, interrupting himself, "one of you is MacWilliams, the man who
had charge of the railroad.  It's no fault of his that the road's not
working.  I understand that he couldn't get the right of way from the
people who owned the land, but I have seen what he has done, and his
plans, and I apologize to him--to MacWilliams.  As for the rest of you,
I'll give you a month's trial.  It will be a month before the next
steamer could get here anyway, and I'll give you that long to redeem
yourselves.  At the end of that time we will have another talk, but you
are here now only on your good behavior and on my sufferance.
Good-morning."

As Clay had boasted, he was not the man to throw up his position
because he found the part he had to play was not that of leading man,
but rather one of general utility, and although it had been several
years since it had been part of his duties to oversee the setting up of
machinery, and the policing of a mining camp, he threw himself as
earnestly into the work before him as though to show his subordinates
that it did not matter who did the work, so long as it was done.  The
men at first were sulky, resentful, and suspicious, but they could not
long resist the fact that Clay was doing the work of five men and five
different kinds of work, not only without grumbling, but apparently
with the keenest pleasure.

He conciliated the rich coffee planters who owned the land which he
wanted for the freight road by calls of the most formal state and
dinners of much less formality, for he saw that the iron mine had its
social as well as its political side.  And with this fact in mind, he
opened the railroad with great ceremony, and much music and feasting,
and the first piece of ore taken out of the mine was presented to the
wife of the Minister of the Interior in a cluster of diamonds, which
made the wives of the other members of the Cabinet regret that their
husbands had not chosen that portfolio.  Six months followed of hard,
unremitting work, during which time the great pier grew out into the
bay from MacWilliams' railroad, and the face of the first mountain was
scarred and torn of its green, and left in mangled nakedness, while the
ringing of hammers and picks, and the racking blasts of dynamite, and
the warning whistles of the dummy-engines drove away the accumulated
silence of centuries.

It had been a long uphill fight, and Clay had enjoyed it mightily.  Two
unexpected events had contributed to help it.  One was the arrival in
Valencia of young Teddy Langham, who came ostensibly to learn the
profession of which Clay was so conspicuous an example, and in reality
to watch over his father's interests.  He was put at Clay's elbow, and
Clay made him learn in spite of himself, for he ruled him and
MacWilliams of both of whom he was very fond, as though, so they
complained, they were the laziest and the most rebellious members of
his entire staff.  The second event of importance was the announcement
made one day by young Langham that his father's physician had ordered
rest in a mild climate, and that he and his daughters were coming in a
month to spend the winter in Valencia, and to see how the son and heir
had developed as a man of business.

The idea of Mr. Langham's coming to visit Olancho to inspect his new
possessions was not a surprise to Clay.  It had occurred to him as
possible before, especially after the son had come to join them there.
The place was interesting and beautiful enough in itself to justify a
visit, and it was only a ten days' voyage from New York.  But he had
never considered the chance of Miss Langham's coming, and when that was
now not only possible but a certainty, he dreamed of little else.  He
lived as earnestly and toiled as indefatigably as before, but the place
was utterly transformed for him.  He saw it now as she would see it
when she came, even while at the same time his own eyes retained their
point of view.  It was as though he had lengthened the focus of a
glass, and looked beyond at what was beautiful and picturesque, instead
of what was near at hand and practicable.  He found himself smiling
with anticipation of her pleasure in the orchids hanging from the dead
trees, high above the opening of the mine, and in the parrots hurling
themselves like gayly colored missiles among the vines; and he
considered the harbor at night with its colored lamps floating on the
black water as a scene set for her eyes.  He planned the dinners that
he would give in her honor on the balcony of the great restaurant in
the Plaza on those nights when the band played, and the senoritas
circled in long lines between admiring rows of officers and caballeros.
And he imagined how, when the ore-boats had been filled and his work
had slackened, he would be free to ride with her along the rough
mountain roads, between magnificent pillars of royal palms, or to
venture forth in excursions down the bay, to explore the caves and to
lunch on board the rolling paddle-wheel steamer, which he would have re
painted and gilded for her coming.  He pictured himself acting as her
guide over the great mines, answering her simple questions about the
strange machinery, and the crew of workmen, and the local government by
which he ruled two thousand men.  It was not on account of any personal
pride in the mines that he wanted her to see them, it was not because
he had discovered and planned and opened them that he wished to show
them to her, but as a curious spectacle that he hoped would give her a
moment's interest.

But his keenest pleasure was when young Langham suggested that they
should build a house for his people on the edge of the hill that jutted
out over the harbor and the great ore pier.  If this were done, Langham
urged, it would be possible for him to see much more of his family than
he would be able to do were they installed in the city, five miles away.

"We can still live in the office at this end of the railroad," the boy
said, "and then we shall have them within call at night when we get
back from work; but if they are in Valencia, it will take the greater
part of the evening going there and all of the night getting back, for
I can't pass that club under three hours. It will keep us out of
temptation."

"Yes, exactly," said Clay, with a guilty smile, "it will keep us out of
temptation."

So they cleared away the underbrush, and put a double force of men to
work on what was to be the most beautiful and comfortable bungalow on
the edge of the harbor.  It had blue and green and white tiles on the
floors, and walls of bamboo, and a red roof of curved tiles to let in
the air, and dragons' heads for water-spouts, and verandas as broad as
the house itself.  There was an open court in the middle hung with
balconies looking down upon a splashing fountain, and to decorate this
patio, they levied upon people for miles around for tropical plants and
colored mats and awnings.  They cut down the trees that hid the view of
the long harbor leading from the sea into Valencia, and planted a
rampart of other trees to hide the iron-ore pier, and they sodded the
raw spots where the men had been building, until the place was as
completely transformed as though a fairy had waved her wand above it.

It was to be a great surprise, and they were all--Clay, MacWilliams,
and Langham--as keenly interested in it as though each were preparing
it for his honeymoon.  They would be walking together in Valencia when
one would say, "We ought to have that for the house," and without
question they would march into the shop together and order whatever
they fancied to be sent out to the house of the president of the mines
on the hill.  They stocked it with wine and linens, and hired a volante
and six horses, and fitted out the driver with a new pair of boots that
reached above his knees, and a silver jacket and a sombrero that was so
heavy with braid that it flashed like a halo about his head in the
sunlight, and he was ordered not to wear it until the ladies came,
under penalty of arrest.  It delighted Clay to find that it was only
the beautiful things and the fine things of his daily routine that
suggested her to him, as though she could not be associated in his mind
with anything less worthy, and he kept saying to himself, "She will
like this view from the end of the terrace," and "This will be her
favorite walk," or "She will swing her hammock here," and "I know she
will not fancy the rug that Weimer chose."

While this fairy palace was growing the three men lived as roughly as
before in the wooden hut at the terminus of the freight road, three
hundred yards below the house, and hidden from it by an impenetrable
rampart of brush and Spanish bayonet. There was a rough road leading
from it to the city, five miles away, which they had extended still
farther up the hill to the Palms, which was the name Langham had
selected for his father's house.  And when it was finally finished,
they continued to live under the corrugated zinc roof of their office
building, and locking up the Palms, left it in charge of a gardener and
a watchman until the coming of its rightful owners.

It had been a viciously hot, close day, and even now the air came in
sickening waves, like a blast from the engine-room of a steamer, and
the heat lightning played round the mountains over the harbor and
showed the empty wharves, and the black outlines of the steamers, and
the white front of the Custom-House, and the long half-circle of
twinkling lamps along the quay. MacWilliams and Langham sat panting on
the lower steps of the office-porch considering whether they were too
lazy to clean themselves and be rowed over to the city, where, as it
was Sunday night, was promised much entertainment.  They had been for
the last hour trying to make up their minds as to this, and appealing
to Clay to stop work and decide for them.  But he sat inside at a table
figuring and writing under the green shade of a student's lamp and made
no answer.  The walls of Clay's office were of unplaned boards,
bristling with splinters, and hung with blue prints and outline maps of
the mine.  A gaudily colored portrait of Madame la Presidenta, the
noble and beautiful woman whom Alvarez, the President of Olancho, had
lately married in Spain, was pinned to the wall above the table.  This
table, with its green oil-cloth top, and the lamp, about which winged
insects beat noisily, and an earthen water-jar--from which the water
dripped as regularly as the ticking of a clock--were the only articles
of furniture in the office.  On a shelf at one side of the door lay the
men's machetes, a belt of cartridges, and a revolver in a holster.

Clay rose from the table and stood in the light of the open door,
stretching himself gingerly, for his joints were sore and stiff with
fording streams and climbing the surfaces of rocks. The red ore and
yellow mud of the mines were plastered over his boots and
riding-breeches, where he had stood knee-deep in the water, and his
shirt stuck to him like a wet bathing-suit, showing his ribs when he
breathed and the curves of his broad chest.  A ring of burning paper
and hot ashes fell from his cigarette to his breast and burnt a hole
through the cotton shirt, and he let it lie there and watched it burn
with a grim smile.

"I wanted to see," he explained, catching the look of listless
curiosity in MacWilliams's eye, "whether there was anything hotter than
my blood.  It's racing around like boiling water in a pot."

"Listen," said Langham, holding up his hand.  "There goes the call for
prayers in the convent, and now it's too late to go to town.  I am
glad, rather.  I'm too tired to keep awake, and besides, they don't
know how to amuse themselves in a civilized way--at least not in my
way.  I wish I could just drop in at home about now; don't you,
MacWilliams?  Just about this time up in God's country all the people
are at the theatre, or they've just finished dinner and are sitting
around sipping cool green mint, trickling through little lumps of ice.
What I'd like--" he stopped and shut one eye and gazed, with his head
on one side, at the unimaginative MacWilliams--"what I'd like to do
now," he continued, thoughtfully, "would be to sit in the front row at
a comic opera, ON THE AISLE.  The prima donna must be very, very
beautiful, and sing most of her songs at me, and there must be three
comedians, all good, and a chorus entirely composed of girls.  I never
could see why they have men in the chorus, anyway.  No one ever looks
at them.  Now that's where I'd like to be.  What would you like,
MacWilliams?"

MacWilliams was a type with which Clay was intimately familiar, but to
the college-bred Langham he was a revelation and a joy. He came from
some little town in the West, and had learned what he knew of
engineering at the transit's mouth, after he had first served his
apprenticeship by cutting sage-brush and driving stakes.  His life had
been spent in Mexico and Central America, and he spoke of the home he
had not seen in ten years with the aggressive loyalty of the confirmed
wanderer, and he was known to prefer and to import canned corn and
canned tomatoes in preference to eating the wonderful fruits of the
country, because the former came from the States and tasted to him of
home.  He had crowded into his young life experiences that would have
shattered the nerves of any other man with a more sensitive conscience
and a less happy sense of humor; but these same experiences had only
served to make him shrewd and self-confident and at his ease when the
occasion or difficulty came.

He pulled meditatively on his pipe and considered Langham's question
deeply, while Clay and the younger boy sat with their arms upon their
knees and waited for his decision in thoughtful silence.

"I'd like to go to the theatre, too," said MacWilliams, with an air as
though to show that he also was possessed of artistic tastes.  "I'd
like to see a comical chap I saw once in '80--oh, long ago--before I
joined the P. Q. & M.  He WAS funny.  His name was Owens; that was his
name, John E. Owens--"

"Oh, for heaven's sake, MacWilliams," protested Langham, in dismay;
"he's been dead for five years."

"Has he?" said MacWilliams, thoughtfully.  "Well--" he concluded,
unabashed, "I can't help that, he's the one I'd like to see best."

"You can have another wish, Mac, you know," urged Langham, "can't he,
Clay?"

Clay nodded gravely, and MacWilliams frowned again in thought. "No," he
said after an effort, "Owens, John E. Owens; that's the one I want to
see."

"Well, now I want another wish, too," said Langham.  "I move we can
each have two wishes. I wish--"

"Wait until I've had mine," said Clay.  "You've had one turn. I want to
be in a place I know in Vienna.  It's not hot like this, but cool and
fresh.  It's an open, out-of-door concert-garden, with hundreds of
colored lights and trees, and there's always a breeze coming through.
And Eduard Strauss, the son, you know, leads the orchestra there, and
they play nothing but waltzes, and he stands in front of them, and
begins by raising himself on his toes, and then he lifts his shoulders
gently--and then sinks back again and raises his baton as though he
were drawing the music out after it, and the whole place seems to rock
and move.  It's like being picked up and carried on the deck of a yacht
over great waves; and all around you are the beautiful Viennese women
and those tall Austrian officers in their long, blue coats and flat
hats and silver swords.  And there are cool drinks--" continued Clay,
with his eyes fixed on the coming storm--"all sorts of cool drinks--in
high, thin glasses, full of ice, all the ice you want--"

"Oh, drop it, will you?" cried Langham, with a shrug of his damp
shoulders.  "I can't stand it.  I'm parching."

"Wait a minute," interrupted MacWilliams, leaning forward and looking
into the night.  "Some one's coming."  There was a sound down the road
of hoofs and the rattle of the land-crabs as they scrambled off into
the bushes, and two men on horseback came suddenly out of the darkness
and drew rein in the light from the open door.  The first was General
Mendoza, the leader of the Opposition in the Senate, and the other, his
orderly.  The General dropped his Panama hat to his knee and bowed in
the saddle three times.

"Good-evening, your Excellency," said Clay, rising.  "Tell that peon to
get my coat, will you?" he added, turning to Langham.  Langham clapped
his hands, and the clanging of a guitar ceased, and their servant and
cook came out from the back of the hut and held the General's horse
while he dismounted.  "Wait until I get you a chair," said Clay.
"You'll find those steps rather bad for white duck."

"I am fortunate in finding you at home," said the officer, smiling, and
showing his white teeth.  "The telephone is not working.  I tried at
the club, but I could not call you."

"It's the storm, I suppose," Clay answered, as he struggled into his
jacket.  "Let me offer you something to drink."  He entered the house,
and returned with several bottles on a tray and a bundle of cigars.
The Spanish-American poured himself out a glass of water, mixing it
with Jamaica rum, and said, smiling again, "It is a saying of your
countrymen that when a man first comes to Olancho he puts a little rum
into his water, and that when he is here some time he puts a little
water in his rum."

"Yes," laughed Clay.  "I'm afraid that's true."

There was a pause while the men sipped at their glasses, and looked at
the horses and the orderly.  The clanging of the guitar began again
from the kitchen.  "You have a very beautiful view here of the harbor,
yes," said Mendoza.  He seemed to enjoy the pause after his ride, and
to be in no haste to begin on the object of his errand.  MacWilliams
and Langham eyed each other covertly, and Clay examined the end of his
cigar, and they all waited.

"And how are the mines progressing, eh?" asked the officer, genially.
"You find much good iron in them, they tell me."

"Yes, we are doing very well," Clay assented; "it was difficult at
first, but now that things are in working order, we are getting out
about ten thousand tons a month.  We hope to increase that soon to
twenty thousand when the new openings are developed and our shipping
facilities are in better shape."

"So much!" exclaimed the General, pleasantly.

"Of which the Government of my country is to get its share of ten per
cent--one thousand tons!  It is munificent!"  He laughed and shook his
head slyly at Clay, who smiled in dissent.

"But you see, sir," said Clay, "you cannot blame us.  The mines have
always been there, before this Government came in, before the Spaniards
were here, before there was any Government at all, but there was not
the capital to open them up, I suppose, or--and it needed a certain
energy to begin the attack.  Your people let the chance go, and, as it
turned out, I think they were very wise in doing so.  They get ten per
cent of the output. That's ten per cent on nothing, for the mines
really didn't exist, as far as you were concerned, until we came, did
they? They were just so much waste land, and they would have remained
so.  And look at the price we paid down before we cut a tree. Three
millions of dollars; that's a good deal of money.  It will be some time
before we realize anything on that investment."

Mendoza shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.  "I will be frank
with you," he said, with the air of one to whom dissimulation is
difficult.  "I come here to-night on an unpleasant errand, but it is
with me a matter of duty, and I am a soldier, to whom duty is the
foremost ever.  I have come to tell you, Mr. Clay, that we, the
Opposition, are not satisfied with the manner in which the Government
has disposed of these great iron deposits.  When I say not satisfied,
my dear friend, I speak most moderately.  I should say that we are
surprised and indignant, and we are determined the wrong it has done
our country shall be righted.  I have the honor to have been chosen to
speak for our party on this most important question, and on next
Tuesday, sir," the General stood up and bowed, as though he were before
a great assembly, "I will rise in the Senate and move a vote of want of
confidence in the Government for the manner in which it has given away
the richest possessions in the storehouse of my country, giving it not
only to aliens, but for a pittance, for a share which is not a share,
but a bribe, to blind the eyes of the people.  It has been a shameful
bargain, and I cannot say who is to blame; I accuse no one.  But I
suspect, and I will demand an investigation; I will demand that the
value not of one-tenth, but of one-half of all the iron that your
company takes out of Olancho shall be paid into the treasury of the
State.  And I come to you to-night, as the Resident Director, to inform
you beforehand of my intention.  I do not wish to take you unprepared.
I do not blame your people; they are business men, they know how to
make good bargains, they get what they best can.  That is the rule of
trade, but they have gone too far, and I advise you to communicate with
your people in New York and learn what they are prepared to offer
now--now that they have to deal with men who do not consider their own
interests but the interests of their country."

Mendoza made a sweeping bow and seated himself, frowning dramatically,
with folded arms.  His voice still hung in the air, for he had spoken
as earnestly as though he imagined himself already standing in the hall
of the Senate championing the cause of the people.

MacWilliams looked up at Clay from where he sat on the steps below him,
but Clay did not notice him, and there was no sound, except the quick
sputtering of the nicotine in Langham's pipe, at which he pulled
quickly, and which was the only outward sign the boy gave of his
interest.  Clay shifted one muddy boot over the other and leaned back
with his hands stuck in his belt.

"Why didn't you speak of this sooner?" he asked.

"Ah, yes, that is fair," said the General, quickly.  "I know that it is
late, and I regret it, and I see that we cause you inconvenience; but
how could I speak sooner when I was ignorant of what was going on?  I
have been away with my troops.  I am a soldier first, a politician
after.  During the last year I have been engaged in guarding the
frontier.  No news comes to a General in the field moving from camp to
camp and always in the saddle; but I may venture to hope, sir, that
news has come to you of me?"

Clay pressed his lips together and bowed his head.

"We have heard of your victories, General, yes," he said; "and on your
return you say you found things had not been going to your liking?"

"That is it," assented the other, eagerly.  "I find that indignation
reigns on every side.  I find my friends complaining of the railroad
which you run across their land.  I find that fifteen hundred soldiers
are turned into laborers, with picks and spades, working by the side of
negroes and your Irish; they have not been paid their wages, and they
have been fed worse than though they were on the march; sickness and--"

Clay moved impatiently and dropped his boot heavily on the porch.

"That was true at first," he interrupted, "but it is not so now.  I
should be glad, General, to take you over the men's quarters at any
time.  As for their not having been paid, they were never paid by their
own Government before they came to us and for the same reason, because
the petty officers kept back the money, just as they have always done.
But the men are paid now.  However, this is not of the most importance.
Who is it that complains of the terms of our concession?"

"Every one!" exclaimed Mendoza, throwing out his arms, "and they ask,
moreover, this: they ask why, if this mine is so rich, why was not the
stock offered here to us in this country?  Why was it not put on the
market, that any one might buy?  We have rich men in Olancho, why
should not they benefit first of all others by the wealth of their own
lands?  But no! we are not asked to buy.  All the stock is taken in New
York, no one benefits but the State, and it receives only ten per cent.
It is monstrous!"

"I see," said Clay, gravely.  "That had not occurred to me before.
They feel they have been slighted.  I see."  He paused for a moment as
if in serious consideration.  "Well," he added, "that might be
arranged."

He turned and jerked his head toward the open door.  "If you boys mean
to go to town to-night, you'd better be moving," he said.  The two men
rose together and bowed silently to their guest.

"I should like if Mr. Langham would remain a moment with us," said
Mendoza, politely.  "I understand that it is his father who controls
the stock of the company.  If we discuss any arrangement it might be
well if he were here."

Clay was sitting with his chin on his breast, and he did not look up,
nor did the young man turn to him for any prompting.  "I'm not down
here as my father's son," he said, "I am an employee of Mr. Clay's.  He
represents the company.  Good-night, sir."

"You think, then," said Clay, "that if your friends were given an
opportunity to subscribe to the stock they would feel less resentful
toward us?  They would think it was fairer to all?"

"I know it," said Mendoza; "why should the stock go out of the country
when those living here are able to buy it?"

"Exactly," said Clay, "of course.  Can you tell me this, General?  Are
the gentlemen who want to buy stock in the mine the same men who are in
the Senate?  The men who are objecting to the terms of our concession?"

"With a few exceptions they are the same men."

Clay looked out over the harbor at the lights of the town, and the
General twirled his hat around his knee and gazed with appreciation at
the stars above him.

"Because if they are," Clay continued, "and they succeed in getting our
share cut down from ninety per cent to fifty per cent, they must see
that the stock would be worth just forty per cent less than it is now."

"That is true," assented the other.  "I have thought of that, and if
the Senators in Opposition were given a chance to subscribe, I am sure
they would see that it is better wisdom to drop their objections to the
concession, and as stockholders allow you to keep ninety per cent of
the output.  And, again," continued Mendoza, "it is really better for
the country that the money should go to its people than that it should
be stored up in the vaults of the treasury, when there is always the
danger that the President will seize it; or, if not this one, the next
one."

"I should think--that is--it seems to me," said Clay with careful
consideration, "that your Excellency might be able to render us great
help in this matter yourself.  We need a friend among the Opposition.
In fact--I see where you could assist us in many ways, where your
services would be strictly in the line of your public duty and yet
benefit us very much.  Of course I cannot speak authoritatively without
first consulting Mr. Langham; but I should think he would allow you
personally to purchase as large a block of the stock as you could wish,
either to keep yourself or to resell and distribute among those of your
friends in Opposition where it would do the most good."

Clay looked over inquiringly to where Mendoza sat in the light of the
open door, and the General smiled faintly, and emitted a pleased little
sigh of relief.  "Indeed," continued Clay, "I should think Mr. Langham
might even save you the formality of purchasing the stock outright by
sending you its money equivalent.  I beg your pardon," he asked,
interrupting himself, "does your orderly understand English?"

"He does not," the General assured him, eagerly, dragging his chair a
little closer.

"Suppose now that Mr. Langham were to put fifty or let us say sixty
thousand dollars to your account in the Valencia Bank, do you think
this vote of want of confidence in the Government on the question of
our concession would still be moved?"

"I am sure it would not," exclaimed the leader of the Opposition,
nodding his head violently.

"Sixty thousand dollars," repeated Clay, slowly, "for yourself; and do
you think, General, that were you paid that sum you would be able to
call off your friends, or would they make a demand for stock also?"

"Have no anxiety at all, they do just what I say," returned Mendoza, in
an eager whisper.  "If I say 'It is all right, I am satisfied with what
the Government has done in my absence,' it is enough.  And I will say
it, I give you the word of a soldier, I will say it.  I will not move a
vote of want of confidence on Tuesday.  You need go no farther than
myself.  I am glad that I am powerful enough to serve you, and if you
doubt me"--he struck his heart and bowed with a deprecatory smile--"you
need not pay in the money in exchange for the stock all at the same
time.  You can pay ten thousand this year, and next year ten thousand
more and so on, and so feel confident that I shall have the interests
of the mine always in my heart.  Who knows what may not happen in a
year?  I may be able to serve you even more.  Who knows how long the
present Government will last?  But I give you my word of honor, no
matter whether I be in Opposition or at the head of the Government, if
I receive every six months the retaining fee of which you speak, I will
be your representative.  And my friends can do nothing.  I despise
them.  _I_ am the Opposition.  You have done well, my dear sir, to
consider me alone."

Clay turned in his chair and looked back of him through the office to
the room beyond.

"Boys," he called, "you can come out now."

He rose and pushed his chair away and beckoned to the orderly who sat
in the saddle holding the General's horse.  Langham and MacWilliams
came out and stood in the open door, and Mendoza rose and looked at
Clay.

"You can go now," Clay said to him, quietly.  "And you can rise in the
Senate on Tuesday and move your vote of want of confidence and object
to our concession, and when you have resumed your seat the Secretary of
Mines will rise in his turn and tell the Senate how you stole out here
in the night and tried to blackmail me, and begged me to bribe you to
be silent, and that you offered to throw over your friends and to take
all that we would give you and keep it yourself.  That will make you
popular with your friends, and will show the Government just what sort
of a leader it has working against it."

Clay took a step forward and shook his finger in the officer's face.
"Try to break that concession; try it.  It was made by one Government
to a body of honest, decent business men, with a Government of their
own back of them, and if you interfere with our conceded rights to work
those mines, I'll have a man-of-war down here with white paint on her
hull, and she'll blow you and your little republic back up there into
the mountains.  Now you can go."

Mendoza had straightened with surprise when Clay first began to speak,
and had then bent forward slightly as though he meant to interrupt him.
His eyebrows were lowered in a straight line, and his lips moved
quickly.

"You poor--" he began, contemptuously.  "Bah," he exclaimed, "you're a
fool; I should have sent a servant to talk with you. You are a
child--but you are an insolent child," he cried, suddenly, his anger
breaking out, "and I shall punish you.  You dare to call me names!  You
shall fight me, you shall fight me to-morrow.  You have insulted an
officer, and you shall meet me at once, to-morrow."

"If I meet you to-morrow," Clay replied, "I will thrash you for your
impertinence.  The only reason I don't do it now is because you are on
my doorstep.  You had better not meet me tomorrow, or at any other
time.  And I have no leisure to fight duels with anybody."

"You are a coward," returned the other, quietly, "and I tell you so
before my servant."

Clay gave a short laugh and turned to MacWilliams in the doorway.

"Hand me my gun, MacWilliams," he said, "it's on the shelf to the
right."

MacWilliams stood still and shook his head.  "Oh, let him alone," he
said.  "You've got him where you want him."

"Give me the gun, I tell you," repeated Clay.  "I'm not going to hurt
him, I'm only going to show him how I can shoot."

MacWilliams moved grudgingly across the porch and brought back the
revolver and handed it to Clay. "Look out now," he said, "it's loaded."

At Clay's words the General had retreated hastily to his horse's head
and had begun unbuckling the strap of his holster, and the orderly
reached back into the boot for his carbine.  Clay told him in Spanish
to throw up his hands, and the man, with a frightened look at his
officer, did as the revolver suggested. Then Clay motioned with his
empty hand for the other to desist. "Don't do that," he said, "I'm not
going to hurt you; I'm only going to frighten you a little."

He turned and looked at the student lamp inside, where it stood on the
table in full view.  Then he raised his revolver.  He did not
apparently hold it away from him by the butt, as other men do, but let
it lie in the palm of his hand, into which it seemed to fit like the
hand of a friend.  His first shot broke the top of the glass chimney,
the second shattered the green globe around it, the third put out the
light, and the next drove the lamp crashing to the floor.  There was a
wild yell of terror from the back of the house, and the noise of a
guitar falling down a flight of steps.  "I have probably killed a very
good cook," said Clay, "as I should as certainly kill you, if I were to
meet you.  Langham," he continued, "go tell that cook to come back."

The General sprang into his saddle, and the altitude it gave him seemed
to bring back some of the jauntiness he had lost.

"That was very pretty," he said; "you have been a cowboy, so they tell
me.  It is quite evident by your manners.  No matter, if we do not meet
to-morrow it will be because I have more serious work to do.  Two
months from to-day there will be a new Government in Olancho and a new
President, and the mines will have a new director.  I have tried to be
your friend, Mr. Clay. See how you like me for an enemy.  Goodnight,
gentlemen."

"Good-night," said MacWilliams, unmoved.  "Please ask your man to close
the gate after you."

When the sound of the hoofs had died away the men still stood in an
uncomfortable silence, with Clay twirling the revolver around his
middle finger.  "I'm sorry I had to make a gallery play of that sort,"
he said.  "But it was the only way to make that sort of man understand."

Langham sighed and shook his head ruefully.

"Well," he said, "I thought all the trouble was over, but it looks to
me as though it had just begun.  So far as I can see they're going to
give the governor a run for his money yet."

Clay turned to MacWilliams.

"How many of Mendoza's soldiers have we in the mines, Mac?" he asked.

"About fifteen hundred," MacWilliams answered.  "But you ought to hear
the way they talk of him."

"They do, eh?" said Clay, with a smile of satisfaction. "That's good.
'Six hundred slaves who hate their masters.' What do they say about me?"

"Oh, they think you're all right.  They know you got them their pay and
all that.  They'd do a lot for you."

"Would they fight for me?" asked Clay.

MacWilliams looked up and laughed uneasily.  "I don't know," he said.
"Why, old man?  What do you mean to do?"

"Oh, I don't know," Clay answered.  "I was just wondering whether I
should like to be President of Olancho."



III

The Langhams were to arrive on Friday, and during the week before that
day Clay went about with a long slip of paper in his pocket which he
would consult earnestly in corners, and upon which he would note down
the things that they had left undone.  At night he would sit staring at
it and turning it over in much concern, and would beg Langham to tell
him what he could have meant when he wrote "see Weimer," or "clean
brasses," or "S. Q. M." "Why should I see Weimer," he would exclaim,
"and which brasses, and what does S. Q. M. stand for, for heaven's
sake?"

They held a full-dress rehearsal in the bungalow to improve its state
of preparation, and drilled the servants and talked English to them, so
that they would know what was wanted when the young ladies came.  It
was an interesting exercise, and had the three young men been less
serious in their anxiety to welcome the coming guests they would have
found themselves very amusing--as when Langham would lean over the
balcony in the court and shout back into the kitchen, in what was
supposed to be an imitation of his sister's manner, "Bring my coffee
and rolls--and don't take all day about it either," while Clay and
MacWilliams stood anxiously below to head off the servants when they
carried in a can of hot water instead of bringing the horses round to
the door, as they had been told to do.

"Of course it's a bit rough and all that," Clay would say, "but they
have only to tell us what they want changed and we can have it ready
for them in an hour."

"Oh, my sisters are all right," Langham would reassure him; "they'll
think it's fine.  It will be like camping-out to them, or a picnic.
They'll understand."

But to make sure, and to "test his girders," as Clay put it, they gave
a dinner, and after that a breakfast.  The President came to the first,
with his wife, the Countess Manuelata, Madame la Presidenta, and
Captain Stuart, late of the Gordon Highlanders, and now in command of
the household troops at the Government House and of the body-guard of
the President.  He was a friend of Clay's and popular with every one
present, except for the fact that he occupied this position, instead of
serving his own Government in his own army.  Some people said he had
been crossed in love, others, less sentimental, that he had forged a
check, or mixed up the mess accounts of his company.  But Clay and
MacWilliams said it concerned no one why he was there, and then
emphasized the remark by picking a quarrel with a man who had given an
unpleasant reason for it.  Stuart, so far as they were concerned, could
do no wrong.

The dinner went off very well, and the President consented to dine with
them in a week, on the invitation of young Langham to meet his father.

"Miss Langham is very beautiful, they tell me," Madame Alvarez said to
Clay.  "I heard of her one winter in Rome; she was presented there and
much admired."

"Yes, I believe she is considered very beautiful," Clay said. "I have
only just met her, but she has travelled a great deal and knows every
one who is of interest, and I think you will like her very much."

"I mean to like her," said the woman.  "There are very few of the
native ladies who have seen much of the world beyond a trip to Paris,
where they live in their hotels and at the dressmaker's while their
husbands enjoy themselves; and sometimes I am rather heart-sick for my
home and my own people.  I was overjoyed when I heard Miss Langham was
to be with us this winter.  But you must not keep her out here to
yourselves.  It is too far and too selfish.  She must spend some time
with me at the Government House."

"Yes," said Clay, "I am afraid of that.  I am afraid the young ladies
will find it rather lonely out here."

"Ah, no," exclaimed the woman, quickly.  "You have made it beautiful,
and it is only a half-hour's ride, except when it rains," she added,
laughing, "and then it is almost as easy to row as to ride."

"I will have the road repaired," interrupted the President. "It is my
wish, Mr. Clay, that you will command me in every way; I am most
desirous to make the visit of Mr. Langham agreeable to him, he is doing
so much for us."

The breakfast was given later in the week, and only men were present.
They were the rich planters and bankers of Valencia, generals in the
army, and members of the Cabinet, and officers from the tiny war-ship
in the harbor.  The breeze from the bay touched them through the open
doors, the food and wine cheered them, and the eager courtesy and
hospitality of the three Americans pleased and flattered them.  They
were of a people who better appreciate the amenities of life than its
sacrifices.

The breakfast lasted far into the afternoon, and, inspired by the
success of the banquet, Clay quite unexpectedly found himself on his
feet with his hand on his heart, thanking the guests for the good-will
and assistance which they had given him in his work.  "I have tramped
down your coffee plants, and cut away your forests, and disturbed your
sleep with my engines, and you have not complained," he said, in his
best Spanish, "and we will show that we are not ungrateful."

Then Weimer, the Consul, spoke, and told them that in his Annual
Consular Report, which he had just forwarded to the State Department,
he had related how ready the Government of Olancho had been to assist
the American company.  "And I hope," he concluded, "that you will allow
me, gentlemen, to propose the health of President Alvarez and the
members of his Cabinet."

The men rose to their feet, one by one, filling their glasses and
laughing and saying, "Viva el Gobernador," until they were all
standing.  Then, as they looked at one another and saw only the faces
of friends, some one of them cried, suddenly, "To President Alvarez,
Dictator of Olancho!"

The cry was drowned in a yell of exultation, and men sprang cheering to
their chairs waving their napkins above their heads, and those who wore
swords drew them and flashed them in the air, and the quiet, lazy
good-nature of the breakfast was turned into an uproarious scene of
wild excitement.  Clay pushed back his chair from the head of the table
with an anxious look at the servants gathered about the open door, and
Weimer clutched frantically at Langham's elbow and whispered, "What did
I say? For heaven's sake, how did it begin?"

The outburst ceased as suddenly as it had started, and old General
Rojas, the Vice-President, called out, "What is said is said, but it
must not be repeated."

Stuart waited until after the rest had gone, and Clay led him out to
the end of the veranda.  "Now will you kindly tell me what that was?"
Clay asked.  "It didn't sound like champagne."

"No," said the other, "I thought you knew.  Alvarez means to proclaim
himself Dictator, if he can, before the spring elections."

"And are you going to help him?"

"Of course," said the Englishman, simply.

"Well, that's all right," said Clay, "but there's no use shouting the
fact all over the shop like that--and they shouldn't drag me into it."

Stuart laughed easily and shook his head.  "It won't be long before
you'll be in it yourself," he said.

Clay awoke early Friday morning to hear the shutters beating viciously
against the side of the house, and the wind rushing through the palms,
and the rain beating in splashes on the zinc roof.  It did not come
soothingly and in a steady downpour, but brokenly, like the rush of
waves sweeping over a rough beach.  He turned on the pillow and shut
his eyes again with the same impotent and rebellious sense of
disappointment that he used to feel when he had wakened as a boy and
found it storming on his holiday, and he tried to sleep once more in
the hope that when he again awoke the sun would be shining in his eyes;
but the storm only slackened and did not cease, and the rain continued
to fall with dreary, relentless persistence.  The men climbed the muddy
road to the Palms, and viewed in silence the wreck which the night had
brought to their plants and garden paths.  Rivulets of muddy water had
cut gutters over the lawn and poured out from under the veranda, and
plants and palms lay bent and broken, with their broad leaves
bedraggled and coated with mud.  The harbor and the encircling
mountains showed dimly through a curtain of warm, sticky rain.  To
something that Langham said of making the best of it, MacWilliams
replied, gloomily, that he would not be at all surprised if the ladies
refused to leave the ship and demanded to be taken home immediately.
"I am sorry," Clay said, simply; "I wanted them to like it."

The men walked back to the office in grim silence, and took turns in
watching with a glass the arms of the semaphore, three miles below, at
the narrow opening of the bay.  Clay smiled nervously at himself, with
a sudden sinking at the heart, and with a hot blush of pleasure, as he
thought of how often he had looked at its great arms out lined like a
mast against the sky, and thanked it in advance for telling him that
she was near.  In the harbor below, the vessels lay with bare yards and
empty decks, the wharves were deserted, and only an occasional small
boat moved across the beaten surface of the bay.

But at twelve o'clock MacWilliams lowered the glass quickly, with a
little gasp of excitement, rubbed its moist lens on the inside of his
coat and turned it again toward a limp strip of bunting that was
crawling slowly up the halyards of the semaphore.  A second dripping
rag answered it from the semaphore in front of the Custom-House, and
MacWilliams laughed nervously and shut the glass.

"It's red," he said; "they've come."

They had planned to wear white duck suits, and go out in a launch with
a flag flying, and they had made MacWilliams purchase a red cummerbund
and a pith helmet; but they tumbled into the launch now, wet and
bedraggled as they were, and raced Weimer in his boat, with the
American flag clinging to the pole, to the side of the big steamer as
she drew slowly into the bay.  Other row-boats and launches and
lighters began to push out from the wharves, men appeared under the
sagging awnings of the bare houses along the river-front, and the
custom and health officers in shining oil-skins and puffing damp cigars
clambered over the side.

"I see them," cried Langham, jumping up and rocking the boat in his
excitement.  "There they are in the bow.  That's Hope waving.  Hope!
hullo, Hope!" he shouted, "hullo!" Clay recognized her standing between
the younger sister and her father, with the rain beating on all of
them, and waving her hand to Langham.  The men took off their hats, and
as they pulled up alongside she bowed to Clay and nodded brightly.
They sent Langham up the gangway first, and waited until he had made
his greetings to his family alone.

"We have had a terrible trip, Mr. Clay," Miss Langham said to him,
beginning, as people will, with the last few days, as though they were
of the greatest importance; "and we could see nothing of you at the
mines at all as we passed--only a wet flag, and a lot of very friendly
workmen, who cheered and fired off pans of dynamite."

"They did, did they?" said Clay, with a satisfied nod. "That's all
right, then.  That was a royal salute in your honor. Kirkland had that
to do.  He's the foreman of A opening.  I am awfully sorry about this
rain--it spoils everything."

"I hope it hasn't spoiled our breakfast," said Mr. Langham. "We haven't
eaten anything this morning, because we wanted a change of diet, and
the captain told us we should be on shore before now."

"We have some carriages for you at the wharf, and we will drive you
right out to the Palms," said young Langham.  "It's shorter by water,
but there's a hill that the girls couldn't climb today. That's the
house we built for you, Governor, with the flag-pole, up there on the
hill; and there's your ugly old pier; and that's where we live, in the
little shack above it, with the tin roof; and that opening to the right
is the terminus of the railroad MacWilliams built.  Where's
MacWilliams?  Here, Mac, I want you to know my father.  This is
MacWilliams, sir, of whom I wrote you."

There was some delay about the baggage, and in getting the party
together in the boats that Langham and the Consul had brought; and
after they had stood for some time on the wet dock, hungry and damp, it
was rather aggravating to find that the carriages which Langham had
ordered to be at one pier had gone to another.  So the new arrivals sat
rather silently under the shed of the levee on a row of cotton-bales,
while Clay and MacWilliams raced off after the carriages.

"I wish we didn't have to keep the hood down," young Langham said,
anxiously, as they at last proceeded heavily up the muddy streets; "it
makes it so hot, and you can't see anything.  Not that it's worth
seeing in all this mud and muck, but it's great when the sun shines.
We had planned it all so differently."

He was alone with his family now in one carriage, and the other men and
the servants were before them in two others.  It seemed an interminable
ride to them all--to the strangers, and to the men who were anxious
that they should be pleased.  They left the city at last, and toiled
along the limestone road to the Palms, rocking from side to side and
sinking in ruts filled with rushing water.  When they opened the flap
of the hood the rain beat in on them, and when they closed it they
stewed in a damp, warm atmosphere of wet leather and horse-hair.

"This is worse than a Turkish bath," said Hope, faintly. "Don't you
live anywhere, Ted?"

"Oh, it's not far now," said the younger brother, dismally; but even as
he spoke the carriage lurched forward and plunged to one side and came
to a halt, and they could hear the streams rushing past the wheels like
the water at the bow of a boat.  A wet, black face appeared at the
opening of the hood, and a man spoke despondently in Spanish.

"He says we're stuck in the mud," explained Langham.  He looked at them
so beseechingly and so pitifully, with the perspiration streaming down
his face, and his clothes damp and bedraggled, that Hope leaned back
and laughed, and his father patted him on the knee.  "It can't be any
worse," he said, cheerfully; "it must mend now.  It is not your fault,
Ted, that we're starving and lost in the mud."

Langham looked out to find Clay and MacWilliams knee-deep in the
running water, with their shoulders against the muddy wheels, and the
driver lashing at the horses and dragging at their bridles. He sprang
out to their assistance, and Hope, shaking off her sister's detaining
hands, jumped out after him, laughing.  She splashed up the hill to the
horses' heads, motioning to the driver to release his hold on their
bridles.

"That is not the way to treat a horse," she said.  "Let me have them.
Are you men all ready down there?" she called. Each of the three men
glued a shoulder to a wheel, and clenched his teeth and nodded.  "All
right, then," Hope called back. She took hold of the huge Mexican bits
close to the mouth, where the pressure was not so cruel, and then
coaxing and tugging by turns, and slipping as often as the horses
themselves, she drew them out of the mud, and with the help of the men
back of the carriage pulled it clear until it stood free again at the
top of the hill.  Then she released her hold on the bridles and looked
down, in dismay, at her frock and hands, and then up at the three men.
They appeared so utterly miserable and forlorn in their muddy garments,
and with their faces washed with the rain and perspiration, that the
girl gave way suddenly to an uncontrollable shriek of delight.  The men
stared blankly at her for a moment, and then inquiringly at one
another, and as the humor of the situation struck them they burst into
an echoing shout of laughter, which rose above the noise of the wind
and rain, and before which the disappointments and trials of the
morning were swept away.  Before they reached the Palms the sun was out
and shining with fierce brilliancy, reflecting its rays on every damp
leaf, and drinking up each glistening pool of water.

MacWilliams and Clay left the Langhams alone together, and returned to
the office, where they assured each other again and again that there
was no doubt, from what each had heard different members of the family
say, that they were greatly pleased with all that had been prepared for
them.

"They think it's fine!" said young Langham, who had run down the hill
to tell them about it.  "I tell you, they are pleased. I took them all
over the house, and they just exclaimed every minute.  Of course," he
said, dispassionately, "I thought they'd like it, but I had no idea it
would please them as much as it has.  My Governor is so delighted with
the place that he's sitting out there on the veranda now, rocking
himself up and down and taking long breaths of sea-air, just as though
he owned the whole coast-line."

Langham dined with his people that night, Clay and MacWilliams having
promised to follow him up the hill later.  It was a night of much
moment to them all, and the two men ate their dinner in silence, each
considering what the coming of the strangers might mean to him.

As he was leaving the room MacWilliams stopped and hovered uncertainly
in the doorway.

"Are you going to get yourself into a dress-suit to-night?" he asked.
Clay said that he thought he would; he wanted to feel quite clean once
more.

"Well, all right, then," the other returned, reluctantly. "I'll do it
for this once, if you mean to, but you needn't think I'm going to make
a practice of it, for I'm not.  I haven't worn a dress-suit," he
continued, as though explaining his principles in the matter, "since
your spread when we opened the railroad--that's six months ago; and the
time before that I wore one at MacGolderick's funeral.  MacGolderick
blew himself up at Puerto Truxillo, shooting rocks for the breakwater.
We never found all of him, but we gave what we could get together as
fine a funeral as those natives ever saw.  The boys, they wanted to
make him look respectable, so they asked me to lend them my dress-suit,
but I told them I meant to wear it myself.  That's how I came to wear a
dress-suit at a funeral.  It was either me or MacGolderick."

"MacWilliams," said Clay, as he stuck the toe of one boot into the heel
of the other, "if I had your imagination I'd give up railroading and
take to writing war clouds for the newspapers."

"Do you mean you don't believe that story?" MacWilliams demanded,
sternly.

"I do," said Clay, "I mean I don't."

"Well, let it go," returned MacWilliams, gloomily; "but there's been
funerals for less than that, let me tell you."

A half-hour later MacWilliams appeared in the door and stood gazing
attentively at Clay arranging his tie before a hand-glass, and then at
himself in his unusual apparel.

"No wonder you voted to dress up," he exclaimed finally, in a tone of
personal injury.  "That's not a dress-suit you've got on anyway.  It
hasn't any tails.  And I hope for your sake, Mr. Clay," he continued,
his voice rising in plaintive indignation, "that you are not going to
play that scarf on us for a vest. And you haven't got a high collar on,
either.  That's only a rough blue print of a dress-suit.  Why, you look
just as comfortable as though you were going to enjoy yourself--and you
look cool, too."

"Well, why not?" laughed Clay.

"Well, but look at me," cried the other.  "Do I look cool?  Do I look
happy or comfortable?  No, I don't.  I look just about the way I feel,
like a fool undertaker.  I'm going to take this thing right off.  You
and Ted Langham can wear your silk scarfs and bobtail coats, if you
like, but if they don't want me in white duck they don't get me."

When they reached the Palms, Clay asked Miss Langham if she did not
want to see his view.  "And perhaps, if you appreciate it properly, I
will make you a present of it," he said, as he walked before her down
the length of the veranda.

"It would be very selfish to keep it all to my self," she said.

"Couldn't we share it?"  They had left the others seated facing the
bay, with MacWilliams and young Langham on the broad steps of the
veranda, and the younger sister and her father sitting in long bamboo
steamer-chairs above them.

Clay and Miss Langham were quite alone.  From the high cliff on which
the Palms stood they could look down the narrow inlet that joined the
ocean and see the moonlight turning the water into a rippling ladder of
light and gilding the dark green leaves of the palms near them with a
border of silver.  Directly below them lay the waters of the bay,
reflecting the red and green lights of the ships at anchor, and beyond
them again were the yellow lights of the town, rising one above the
other as the city crept up the hill.  And back of all were the
mountains, grim and mysterious, with white clouds sleeping in their
huge valleys, like masses of fog.

Except for the ceaseless murmur of the insect life about them the night
was absolutely still--so still that the striking of the ships' bells in
the harbor came to them sharply across the surface of the water, and
they could hear from time to time the splash of some great fish and the
steady creaking of an oar in a rowlock that grew fainter and fainter as
it grew further away, until it was drowned in the distance.  Miss
Langham was for a long time silent.  She stood with her hands clasped
behind her, gazing from side to side into the moonlight, and had
apparently forgotten that Clay was present.

"Well," he said at last, "I think you appreciate it properly. I was
afraid you would exclaim about it, and say it was fine, or charming, or
something."

Miss Langham turned to him and smiled slightly.  "And you told me once
that you knew me so very well," she said.

Clay chose to forget much that he had said on that night when he had
first met her.  He knew that he had been bold then, and had dared to be
so because he did not think he would see her again; but, now that he
was to meet her every day through several months, it seemed better to
him that they should grow to know each other as they really were,
simply and sincerely, and without forcing the situation in any way.

So he replied, "I don't know you so well now.  You must remember I
haven't seen you for a year."

"Yes, but you hadn't seen me for twenty-two years then," she answered.
"I don't think you have changed much," she went on. "I expected to find
you gray with cares.  Ted wrote us about the way you work all day at
the mines and sit up all night over calculations and plans and reports.
But you don't show it.  When are you going to take us over the mines?
To-morrow?  I am very anxious to see them, but I suppose father will
want to inspect them first.  Hope knows all about them, I believe; she
knows their names, and how much you have taken out, and how much you
have put in, too, and what MacWilliams's railroad cost, and who got the
contract for the ore pier.  Ted told us in his letters, and she used to
work it out on the map in father's study.  She is a most energetic
child; I think sometimes she should have been a boy.  I wish I could be
the help to any one that she is to my father and to me.  Whenever I am
blue or down she makes fun of me, and--"

"Why should you ever be blue?" asked Clay, abruptly.

"There is no real reason, I suppose," the girl answered, smiling,
"except that life is so very easy for me that I have to invent some
woes.  I should be better for a few reverses."  And then she went on in
a lower voice, and turning her head away, "In our family there is no
woman older than I am to whom I can go with questions that trouble me.
Hope is like a boy, as I said, and plays with Ted, and my father is
very busy with his affairs, and since my mother died I have been very
much alone.  A man cannot understand.  And I cannot understand why I
should be speaking to you about myself and my troubles, except--" she
added, a little wistfully, "that you once said you were interested in
me, even if it was as long as a year ago. And because I want you to be
very kind to me, as you have been to Ted, and I hope that we are going
to be very good friends."

She was so beautiful, standing in the shadow with the moonlight about
her and with her hand held out to him, that Clay felt as though the
scene were hardly real.  He took her hand in his and held it for a
moment.  His pleasure in the sweet friendliness of her manner and in
her beauty was so great that it kept him silent.

"Friends!" he laughed under his breath.  "I don't think there is much
danger of our not being friends.  The danger lies," he went on,
smiling, "in my not being able to stop there."

Miss Langham made no sign that she had heard him, but turned and walked
out into the moonlight and down the porch to where the others were
sitting.

Young Langham had ordered a native orchestra of guitars and reed
instruments from the town to serenade his people, and they were
standing in front of the house in the moonlight as Miss Langham and
Clay came forward.  They played the shrill, eerie music of their
country with a passion and feeling that filled out the strange tropical
scene around them; but Clay heard them only as an accompaniment to his
own thoughts, and as a part of the beautiful night and the tall,
beautiful girl who had dominated it.  He watched her from the shadow as
she sat leaning easily forward and looking into the night.  The
moonlight fell full upon her, and though she did not once look at him
or turn her head in his direction, he felt as though she must be
conscious of his presence, as though there were already an
understanding between them which she herself had established.  She had
asked him to be her friend.  That was only a pretty speech, perhaps;
but she had spoken of herself, and had hinted at her perplexities and
her loneliness, and he argued that while it was no compliment to be
asked to share another's pleasure, it must mean something when one was
allowed to learn a little of another's troubles.

And while his mind was flattered and aroused by this promise of
confidence between them, he was rejoicing in the rare quality of her
beauty, and in the thought that she was to be near him, and near him
here, of all places.  It seemed a very wonderful thing to
Clay--something that could only have happened in a novel or a play.
For while the man and the hour frequently appeared together, he had
found that the one woman in the world and the place and the man was a
much more difficult combination to bring into effect.  No one, he
assured himself thankfully, could have designed a more lovely setting
for his love-story, if it was to be a love-story, and he hoped it was,
than this into which she had come of her own free will.  It was a land
of romance and adventure, of guitars and latticed windows, of warm
brilliant days and gorgeous silent nights, under purple heavens and
white stars.  And he was to have her all to himself, with no one near
to interrupt, no other friends, even, and no possible rival.  She was
not guarded now by a complex social system, with its responsibilities.
He was the most lucky of men.  Others had only seen her in her
drawing-room or in an opera-box, but he was free to ford
mountain-streams at her side, or ride with her under arches of the
great palms, or to play a guitar boldly beneath her window.  He was
free to come and go at any hour; not only free to do so, but the very
nature of his duties made it necessary that they should be thrown
constantly together.

The music of the violins moved him and touched him deeply, and stirred
depths at which he had not guessed.  It made him humble and deeply
grateful, and he felt how mean and unworthy he was of such great
happiness.  He had never loved any woman as he felt that he could love
this woman, as he hoped that he was to love her.  For he was not so far
blinded by her beauty and by what he guessed her character to be, as to
imagine that he really knew her.  He only knew what he hoped she was,
what he believed the soul must be that looked out of those kind,
beautiful eyes, and that found utterance in that wonderful voice which
could control him and move him by a word.

He felt, as he looked at the group before him, how lonely his own life
had been, how hard he had worked for so little--for what other men
found ready at hand when they were born into the world.

He felt almost a touch of self-pity at his own imperfectness; and the
power of his will and his confidence in himself, of which he was so
proud, seemed misplaced and little.  And then he wondered if he had not
neglected chances; but in answer to this his injured self-love rose to
rebut the idea that he had wasted any portion of his time, and he
assured himself that he had done the work that he had cut out for
himself to do as best he could; no one but himself knew with what
courage and spirit.  And so he sat combating with himself, hoping one
moment that she would prove what he believed her to be, and the next,
scandalized at his temerity in daring to think of her at all.

The spell lifted as the music ceased, and Clay brought himself back to
the moment and looked about him as though he were waking from a dream
and had expected to see the scene disappear and the figures near him
fade into the moonlight.

Young Langham had taken a guitar from one of the musicians and pressed
it upon MacWilliams, with imperative directions to sing such and such
songs, of which, in their isolation, they had grown to think most
highly, and MacWilliams was protesting in much embarrassment.

MacWilliams had a tenor voice which he maltreated in the most villanous
manner by singing directly through his nose.  He had a taste for
sentimental songs, in which "kiss" rhymed with "bliss," and in which
"the people cry" was always sure to be followed with "as she goes by,
that's pretty Katie Moody," or "Rosie McIntyre."  He had gathered his
songs at the side of camp-fires, and in canteens at the first
section-house of a new railroad, and his original collection of ballads
had had but few additions in several years.  MacWilliams at first was
shy, which was quite a new development, until he made them promise to
laugh if they wanted to laugh, explaining that he would not mind that
so much as he would the idea that he thought he was serious.

The song of which he was especially fond was one called "He never cares
to wander from his own Fireside," which was especially appropriate in
coming from a man who had visited almost every spot in the three
Americas, except his home, in ten years.  MacWilliams always ended the
evening's entertainment with this chorus, no matter how many times it
had been sung previously, and seemed to regard it with much the same
veneration that the true Briton feels for his national anthem.

The words of the chorus were:

    "He never cares to wander from his own fireside,
      He never cares to wander or to roam.
      With his babies on his knee,
      He's as happy as can be,
      For there's no place like Home, Sweet Home."

MacWilliams loved accidentals, and what he called "barber-shop chords."
He used a beautiful accidental at the word "be," of which he was very
fond, and he used to hang on that note for a long time, so that those
in the extreme rear of the hall, as he was wont to explain, should get
the full benefit of it.  And it was his custom to emphasize "for" in
the last line by speaking instead of singing it, and then coming to a
full stop before dashing on again with the excellent truth that "there
is NO place like Home, Sweet Home."

The men at the mines used to laugh at him and his song at first, but
they saw that it was not to be so laughed away, and that he regarded it
with some peculiar sentiment.  So they suffered him to sing it in peace.

MacWilliams went through his repertoire to the unconcealed amusement of
young Langham and Hope.  When he had finished he asked Hope if she knew
a comic song of which he had only heard by reputation.  One of the men
at the mines had gained a certain celebrity by claiming to have heard
it in the States, but as he gave a completely new set of words to the
tune of the "Wearing of the Green" as the true version, his veracity
was doubted. Hope said she knew it, of course, and they all went into
the drawing-room, where the men grouped themselves about the piano. It
was a night they remembered long afterward.  Hope sat at the piano
protesting and laughing, but singing the songs of which the new-comers
had become so weary, but which the three men heard open-eyed, and
hailed with shouts of pleasure.  The others enjoyed them and their
delight, as though they were people in a play expressing themselves in
this extravagant manner for their entertainment, until they understood
how poverty-stricken their lives had been and that they were not only
enjoying the music for itself, but because it was characteristic of all
that they had left behind them.  It was pathetic to hear them boast of
having read of a certain song in such a paper, and of the fact that
they knew the plot of a late comic opera and the names of those who had
played in it, and that it had or had not been acceptable to the New
York public.

"Dear me," Hope would cry, looking over her shoulder with a despairing
glance at her sister and father, "they don't even know 'Tommy Atkins'!"

It was a very happy evening for them all, foreshadowing, as it did, a
continuation of just such evenings.  Young Langham was radiant with
pleasure at the good account which Clay had given of him to his father,
and Mr. Langham was gratified, and proud of the manner in which his son
and heir had conducted himself; and MacWilliams, who had never before
been taken so simply and sincerely by people of a class that he had
always held in humorous awe, felt a sudden accession of dignity, and an
unhappy fear that when they laughed at what he said, it was because its
sense was so utterly different from their point of view, and not
because they saw the humor of it.  He did not know what the word "snob"
signified, and in his roughened, easy-going nature there was no touch
of false pride; but he could not help thinking how surprised his people
would be if they could see him, whom they regarded as a wanderer and
renegade on the face of the earth and the prodigal of the family, and
for that reason the best loved, leaning over a grand piano, while one
daughter of his much-revered president played comic songs for his
delectation, and the other, who according to the newspapers refused
princes daily, and who was the most wonderful creature he had ever
seen, poured out his coffee and brought it to him with her own hands.

The evening came to an end at last, and the new arrivals accompanied
their visitors to the veranda as they started to their cabin for the
night.  Clay was asking Mr. Langham when he wished to visit the mines,
and the others were laughing over farewell speeches, when young Langham
startled them all by hurrying down the length of the veranda and
calling on them to follow.

"Look!" he cried, pointing down the inlet.  "Here comes a man-of-war,
or a yacht.  Isn't she smart-looking?  What can she want here at this
hour of the night?  They won't let them land.  Can you make her out,
MacWilliams?"

A long, white ship was steaming slowly up the inlet, and passed within
a few hundred feet of the cliff on which they were standing.

"Why, it's the 'Vesta'!" exclaimed Hope, wonderingly.  "I thought she
wasn't coming for a week?"

"It can't be the 'Vesta'!" said the elder sister; "she was not to have
sailed from Havana until to-day."

"What do you mean?" asked Langham.  "Is it King's boat?  Do you expect
him here?  Oh, what fun!  I say, Clay, here's the 'Vesta,' Reggie
King's yacht, and he's no end of a sport.  We can go all over the place
now, and he can land us right at the door of the mines if we want to."

"Is it the King I met at dinner that night?" asked Clay, turning to
Miss Langham.

"Yes," she said.  "He wanted us to come down on the yacht, but we
thought the steamer would be faster; so he sailed without us and was to
have touched at Havana, but he has apparently changed his course.
Doesn't she look like a phantom ship in the moonlight?"

Young Langham thought he could distinguish King among the white figures
on the bridge, and tossed his hat and shouted, and a man in the stern
of the yacht replied with a wave of his hand.

"That must be Mr. King," said Hope.  "He didn't bring any one with him,
and he seems to be the only man aft."

They stood watching the yacht as she stopped with a rattle of
anchor-chains and a confusion of orders that came sharply across the
water, and then the party separated and the three men walked down the
hill, Langham eagerly assuring the other two that King was a very good
sort, and telling them what a treasure-house his yacht was, and how he
would have probably brought the latest papers, and that he would
certainly give a dance on board in their honor.

The men stood for some short time together, after they had reached the
office, discussing the great events of the day, and then with cheerful
good-nights disappeared into their separate rooms.

An hour later Clay stood without his coat, and with a pen in his hand,
at MacWilliams's bedside and shook him by the shoulder.

"I'm not asleep," said MacWilliams, sitting up; "what is it? What have
you been doing?" he demanded.  "Not working?"

"There were some reports came in after we left," said Clay, "and I find
I will have to see Kirkland to-morrow morning.  Send them word to run
me down on an engine at five-thirty, will you? I am sorry to have to
wake you, but I couldn't remember in which shack that engineer lives."

MacWilliams jumped from his bed and began kicking about the floor for
his boots.  "Oh, that's all right," he said.  "I wasn't asleep, I was
just--" he lowered his voice that Langham might not hear him through
the canvas partitions--"I was just lying awake playing duets with the
President, and racing for the International Cup in my new centre-board
yacht, that's all!"

MacWilliams buttoned a waterproof coat over his pajamas and stamped his
bare feet into his boots.  "Oh, I tell you, Clay," he said with a grim
chuckle, "we're mixing right in with the four hundred, we are!  I'm
substitute and understudy when anybody gets ill.  We're right in our
own class at last!  Pure amateurs with no professional record against
us.  Me and President Langham, I guess!" He struck a match and lit the
smoky wick in a tin lantern.

"But now," he said, cheerfully, "my time being too valuable for me to
sleep, I will go wake up that nigger engine-driver and set his alarm
clock at five-thirty.  Five-thirty, I believe you said.  All right;
good-night."  And whistling cheerfully to himself MacWilliams
disappeared up the hill, his body hidden in the darkness and his legs
showing fantastically in the light of the swinging lantern.

Clay walked out upon the veranda and stood with his back to one of the
pillars.  MacWilliams and his pleasantries disturbed and troubled him.
Perhaps, after all, the boy was right.  It seemed absurd, but it was
true.  They were only employees of Langham--two of the thousands of
young men who were working all over the United States to please him, to
make him richer, to whom he was only a name and a power, which meant an
increase of salary or the loss of place.

Clay laughed and shrugged his shoulders.  He knew that he was not in
that class; if he did good work it was because his self-respect
demanded it of him; he did not work for Langham or the Olancho Mining
Company (Limited).  And yet he turned with almost a feeling of
resentment toward the white yacht lying calmly in magnificent repose a
hundred yards from his porch.

He could see her as clearly in her circle of electric lights as though
she were a picture and held in the light of a stereopticon on a screen.
He could see her white decks, and the rails of polished brass, and the
comfortable wicker chairs and gay cushions and flat coils of rope, and
the tapering masts and intricate rigging.  How easy it was made for
some men!  This one had come like the prince in the fairy tale on his
magic carpet.  If Alice Langham were to leave Valencia that next day,
Clay could not follow her.  He had his duties and responsibilities; he
was at another man's bidding.

But this Prince Fortunatus had but to raise anchor and start in
pursuit, knowing that he would be welcome wherever he found her. That
was the worst of it to Clay, for he knew that men did not follow women
from continent to continent without some assurance of a friendly
greeting.  Clay's mind went back to the days when he was a boy, when
his father was absent fighting for a lost cause; when his mother taught
in a little schoolhouse under the shadow of Pike's Peak, and when Kit
Carson was his hero.  He thought of the poverty of those days poverty
so mean and hopeless that it was almost something to feel shame for; of
the days that followed when, an orphan and without a home, he had
sailed away from New Orleans to the Cape.  How the mind of the
mathematician, which he had inherited from the Boston schoolmistress,
had been swayed by the spirit of the soldier, which he had inherited
from his father, and which led him from the mines of South Africa to
little wars in Madagascar, Egypt, and Algiers.  It had been a life as
restless as the seaweed on a rock.  But as he looked back to its poor
beginnings and admitted to himself its later successes, he gave a sigh
of content, and shaking off the mood stood up and paced the length of
the veranda.

He looked up the hill to the low-roofed bungalow with the palm-leaves
about it, outlined against the sky, and as motionless as patterns cut
in tin.  He had built that house.  He had built it for her.  That was
her room where the light was shining out from the black bulk of the
house about it like a star.  And beyond the house he saw his five great
mountains, the knuckles of the giant hand, with its gauntlet of iron
that lay shut and clenched in the face of the sea that swept up
whimpering before it.  Clay felt a boyish, foolish pride rise in his
breast as he looked toward the great mines he had discovered and
opened, at the iron mountains that were crumbling away before his touch.

He turned his eyes again to the blazing yacht, and this time there was
no trace of envy in them.  He laughed instead, partly with pleasure at
the thought of the struggle he scented in the air, and partly at his
own braggadocio.

"I'm not afraid," he said, smiling, and shaking his head at the white
ship that loomed up like a man-of-war in the black waters. "I'm not
afraid to fight you for anything worth fighting for."

He bowed his bared head in good-night toward the light on the hill, as
he turned and walked back into his bedroom.  "And I think," he murmured
grimly, as he put out the light, "that she is worth fighting for."



IV

The work which had called Clay to the mines kept him there for some
time, and it was not until the third day after the arrival of the
Langhams that he returned again to the Palms.  On the afternoon when he
climbed the hill to the bungalow he found the Langhams as he had left
them, with the difference that King now occupied a place in the family
circle.  Clay was made so welcome, and especially so by King, that he
felt rather ashamed of his sentiments toward him, and considered his
three days of absence to be well repaid by the heartiness of their
greeting.

"For myself," said Mr. Langham, "I don't believe you had anything to do
at the mines at all.  I think you went away just to show us how
necessary you are.  But if you want me to make a good report of our
resident director on my return, you had better devote yourself less to
the mines while you are here and more to us."  Clay said he was glad to
find that his duties were to be of so pleasant a nature, and asked them
what they had seen and what they had done.

They told him they had been nowhere, but had waited for his return in
order that he might act as their guide.

"Then you should see the city at once," said Clay, "and I will have the
volante brought to the door, and we can all go in this afternoon.
There is room for the four of you inside, and I can sit on the box-seat
with the driver."

"No," said King, "let Hope or me sit on the box-seat.  Then we can
practise our Spanish on the driver."

"Not very well," Clay replied, "for the driver sits on the first horse,
like a postilion.  It's a sort of tandem without reins.  Haven't you
seen it yet?  We consider the volante our proudest exhibit."  So Clay
ordered the volante to be brought out, and placed them facing each
other in the open carriage, while he climbed to the box-seat, from
which position of vantage he pointed out and explained the objects of
interest they passed, after the manner of a professional guide.  It was
a warm, beautiful afternoon, and the clear mists of the atmosphere
intensified the rich blue of the sky, and the brilliant colors of the
houses, and the different shades of green of the trees and bushes that
lined the highroad to the capital.

"To the right, as we descend," said Clay, speaking over his shoulder,
"you see a tin house.  It is the home of the resident director of the
Olancho Mining Company (Limited), and of his able lieutenants, Mr.
Theodore Langham and Mr. MacWilliams. The building on the extreme left
is the round-house, in which Mr. MacWilliams stores his three
locomotive engines, and in the far middle-distance is Mr. MacWilliams
himself in the act of repairing a water-tank.  He is the one in a suit
of blue overalls, and as his language at such times is free, we will
drive rapidly on and not embarrass him.  Besides," added the engineer,
with the happy laugh of a boy who had been treated to a holiday, "I am
sure that I am not setting him the example of fixity to duty which he
should expect from his chief."

They passed between high hedges of Spanish bayonet, and came to mud
cabins thatched with palm-leaves, and alive with naked, little
brown-bodied children, who laughed and cheered to them as they passed.

"It's a very beautiful country for the pueblo," was Clay's comment.
"Different parts of the same tree furnish them with food, shelter, and
clothing, and the sun gives them fuel, and the Government changes so
often that they can always dodge the tax-collector."

From the mud cabins they came to more substantial one-story houses of
adobe, with the walls painted in two distinct colors, blue, pink, or
yellow, with red-tiled roofs, and the names with which they had been
christened in bold black letters above the entrances.  Then the
carriage rattled over paved streets, and they drove between houses of
two stories painted more decorously in pink and light blue, with
wide-open windows, guarded by heavy bars of finely wrought iron and
ornamented with scrollwork in stucco.  The principal streets were given
up to stores and cafs, all wide open to the pavement and protected
from the sun by brilliantly striped awnings, and gay with the national
colors of Olancho in flags and streamers.  In front of them sat
officers in uniform, and the dark-skinned dandies of Valencia, in white
duck suits and Panama hats, toying with tortoise shell canes, which
could be converted, if the occasion demanded, into blades of Toledo
steel.  In the streets were priests and bare-legged mule drivers, and
ragged ranchmen with red-caped cloaks hanging to their sandals, and
negro women, with bare shoulders and long trains, vending lottery
tickets and rolling huge cigars between their lips.  It was an old
story to Clay and King, but none of the others had seen a
Spanish-American city before; they were familiar with the Far East and
the Mediterranean, but not with the fierce, hot tropics of their sister
continent, and so their eyes were wide open, and they kept calling
continually to one another to notice some new place or figure.

They in their turn did not escape from notice or comment.  The two
sisters would have been conspicuous anywhere--in a queen's drawing-room
or on an Indian reservation.  Theirs was a type that the caballeros and
senoritas did not know.  With them dark hair was always associated with
dark complexions, the rich duskiness of which was always vulgarized by
a coat of powder, and this fair blending of pink and white skin under
masses of black hair was strangely new, so that each of the few women
who were to be met on the street turned to look after the carriage,
while the American women admired their mantillas, and felt that the
straw sailor-hats they wore had become heavy and unfeminine.

Clay was very happy in picking out what was most characteristic and
picturesque, and every street into which he directed the driver to take
them seemed to possess some building or monument that was of peculiar
interest.  They did not know that he had mapped out this ride many
times before, and was taking them over a route which he had already
travelled with them in imagination. King knew what the capital would be
like before he entered it, from his experience of other South American
cities, but he acted as though it were all new to him, and allowed Clay
to explain, and to give the reason for those features of the place that
were unusual and characteristic.  Clay noticed this and appealed to him
from time to time, when he was in doubt; but the other only smiled back
and shook his head, as much as to say, "This is your city; they would
rather hear about it from you."

Clay took them to the principal shops, where the two girls held
whispered consultations over lace mantillas, which they had at once
determined to adopt, and bought the gorgeous paper fans, covered with
brilliant pictures of bull-fighters in suits of silver tinsel; and from
these open stores he led them to a dingy little shop, where there was
old silver and precious hand-painted fans of mother-of-pearl that had
been pawned by families who had risked and lost all in some revolution;
and then to another shop, where two old maiden ladies made a
particularly good guava; and to tobacconists, where the men bought a
few of the native cigars, which, as they were a monopoly of the
Government, were as bad as Government monopolies always are.

Clay felt a sudden fondness for the city, so grateful was he to it for
entertaining her as it did, and for putting its best front forward for
her delectation.  He wanted to thank some one for building the quaint
old convent, with its yellow walls washed to an orange tint, and black
in spots with dampness; and for the fountain covered with green moss
that stood before its gate, and around which were gathered the girls
and women of the neighborhood with red water-jars on their shoulders,
and little donkeys buried under stacks of yellow sugar-cane, and the
negro drivers of the city's green water-carts, and the blue wagons that
carried the manufactured ice.  Toward five o'clock they decided to
spend the rest of the day in the city, and to telephone for the two
boys to join them at La Venus, the great restaurant on the plaza, where
Clay had invited them to dine.

He suggested that they should fill out the time meanwhile by a call on
the President, and after a search for cards in various pocketbooks,
they drove to the Government palace, which stood in an open square in
the heart of the city.

As they arrived the President and his wife were leaving for their
afternoon drive on the Alameda, the fashionable parade-ground of the
city, and the state carriage and a squad of cavalry appeared from the
side of the palace as the visitors drove up to the entrance.  But at
the sight of Clay, General Alvarez and his wife retreated to the house
again and made them welcome.  The President led the men into his
reception-room and entertained them with champagne and cigarettes, not
manufactured by his Government; and his wife, after first conducting
the girls through the state drawing-room, where the late sunlight shone
gloomily on strange old portraits of assassinated presidents and
victorious generals, and garish yellow silk furniture, brought them to
her own apartments, and gave them tea after a civilized fashion, and
showed them how glad she was to see some one of her own world again.

During their short visit Madame Alvarez talked a greater part of the
time herself, addressing what she said to Miss Langham, but looking at
Hope.  It was unusual for Hope to be singled out in this way when her
sister was present, and both the sisters noticed it and spoke of it
afterwards.  They thought Madame Alvarez very beautiful and
distinguished-looking, and she impressed them, even after that short
knowledge of her, as a woman of great force of character.

"She was very well dressed for a Spanish woman," was Miss Langham's
comment, later in the afternoon.  "But everything she had on was just a
year behind the fashions, or twelve steamer days behind, as Mr.
MacWilliams puts it."

"She reminded me," said Hope, "of a black panther I saw once in a
circus."

"Dear me!" exclaimed the sister, "I don't see that at all. Why?"

Hope said she did not know why; she was not given to analyzing her
impressions or offering reasons for them.  "Because the panther looked
so unhappy," she explained, doubtfully, "and restless; and he kept
pacing up and down all the time, and hitting his head against the bars
as he walked as though he liked the pain.  Madame Alvarez seemed to me
to be just like that--as though she were shut up somewhere and wanted
to be free."

When Madame Alvarez and the two sisters had joined the men, they all
walked together to the terrace, and the visitors waited until the
President and his wife should take their departure.  Hope noticed, in
advance of the escort of native cavalry, an auburn-haired, fair-skinned
young man who was sitting an English saddle.

The officer's eyes were blue and frank and attractive-looking, even as
they then were fixed ahead of him with a military lack of expression;
but he came to life very suddenly when the President called to him, and
prodded his horse up to the steps and dismounted.  He was introduced by
Alvarez as "Captain Stuart of my household troops, late of the Gordon
Highlanders.  Captain Stuart," said the President, laying his hand
affectionately on the younger man's epaulette, "takes care of my life
and the safety of my home and family.  He could have the command of the
army if he wished; but no, he is fond of us, and he tells me we are in
more need of protection from our friends at home than from our enemies
on the frontier.  Perhaps he knows best.  I trust him, Mr. Langham,"
added the President, solemnly, "as I trust no other man in all this
country."

"I am very glad to meet Captain Stuart, I am sure," said Mr. Langham,
smiling, and appreciating how the shyness of the Englishman must be
suffering under the praises of the Spaniard. And Stuart was indeed so
embarrassed that he flushed under his tan, and assured Clay, while
shaking hands with them all, that he was delighted to make his
acquaintance; at which the others laughed, and Stuart came to himself
sufficiently to laugh with them, and to accept Clay's invitation to
dine with them later.

They found the two boys waiting in the caf of the restaurant where
they had arranged to meet, and they ascended the steps together to the
table on the balcony that Clay had reserved for them.

The young engineer appeared at his best as host.  The responsibility of
seeing that a half-dozen others were amused and content sat well upon
him; and as course followed course, and the wines changed, and the
candles left the rest of the room in darkness and showed only the table
and the faces around it, they all became rapidly more merry and the
conversation intimately familiar.

Clay knew the kind of table-talk to which the Langhams were accustomed,
and used the material around his table in such a way that the talk
there was vastly different.  From King he drew forth tales of the
buried cities he had first explored, and then robbed of their ugliest
idols.  He urged MacWilliams to tell carefully edited stories of life
along the Chagres before the Scandal came, and of the fastnesses of the
Andes; and even Stuart grew braver and remembered "something of the
same sort" he had seen at Fort Nilt, in Upper Burma.

"Of course," was Clay's comment at the conclusion of one of these
narratives, "being an Englishman, Stuart left out the point of the
story, which was that he blew in the gates of the fort with a charge of
dynamite.  He got a D. S. O. for doing it."

"Being an Englishman," said Hope, smiling encouragingly on the
conscious Stuart, "he naturally would leave that out."

Mr. Langham and his daughters formed an eager audience.  They had never
before met at one table three men who had known such experiences, and
who spoke of them as though they must be as familiar in the lives of
the others as in their own--men who spoiled in the telling stories that
would have furnished incidents for melodramas, and who impressed their
hearers more with what they left unsaid, and what was only suggested,
than what in their view was the most important point.

The dinner came to an end at last, and Mr. Langham proposed that they
should go down and walk with the people in the plaza; but his two
daughters preferred to remain as spectators on the balcony, and Clay
and Stuart stayed with them.

"At last!" sighed Clay, under his breath, seating himself at Miss
Langham's side as she sat leaning forward with her arms upon the
railing and looking down into the plaza below.  She made no sign at
first that she had heard him, but as the voices of Stuart and Hope rose
from the other end of the balcony she turned her head and asked, "Why
at last?"

"Oh, you couldn't understand," laughed Clay.  "You have not been
looking forward to just one thing and then had it come true. It is the
only thing that ever did come true to me, and I thought it never would."

"You don't try to make me understand," said the girl, smiling, but
without turning her eyes from the moving spectacle below her.  Clay
considered her challenge silently.  He did not know just how much it
might mean from her, and the smile robbed it of all serious intent; so
he, too, turned and looked down into the great square below them,
content, now that she was alone with him, to take his time.

At one end of the plaza the President's band was playing native waltzes
that came throbbing through the trees and beating softly above the
rustling skirts and clinking spurs of the senoritas and officers,
sweeping by in two opposite circles around the edges of the tessellated
pavements.  Above the palms around the square arose the dim, white
facade of the cathedral, with the bronze statue of Anduella, the
liberator of Olancho, who answered with his upraised arm and cocked hat
the cheers of an imaginary populace.  Clay's had been an unobtrusive
part in the evening's entertainment, but he saw that the others had
been pleased, and felt a certain satisfaction in thinking that King
himself could not have planned and carried out a dinner more admirable
in every way.  He was gratified that they should know him to be not
altogether a barbarian.  But what he best liked to remember was that
whenever he had spoken she had listened, even when her eyes were turned
away and she was pretending to listen to some one else.  He tormented
himself by wondering whether this was because he interested her only as
a new and strange character, or whether she felt in some way how
eagerly he was seeking her approbation.  For the first time in his life
he found himself considering what he was about to say, and he suited it
for her possible liking.  It was at least some satisfaction that she
had, if only for the time being, singled him out as of especial
interest, and he assured himself that the fault would be his if her
interest failed.  He no longer looked on himself as an outsider.

Stuart's voice arose from the farther end of the balcony, where the
white figure of Hope showed dimly in the darkness.

"They are talking about you over there," said Miss Langham, turning
toward him.

"Well, I don't mind," answered Clay, "as long as they talk about
me--over there."

Miss Langham shook her head.  "You are very frank and audacious," she
replied, doubtfully, "but it is rather pleasant as a change."

"I don't call that audacious, to say I don't want to be interrupted
when I am talking to you.  Aren't the men you meet generally
audacious?" he asked.  "I can see why not--though," he continued, "you
awe them."

"I can't think that's a nice way to affect people," protested Miss
Langham, after a pause.  "I don't awe you, do I?"

"Oh, you affect me in many different ways," returned Clay, cheerfully.
"Sometimes I am very much afraid of you, and then again my feelings are
only those of unlimited admiration."

"There, again, what did I tell you?" said Miss Langham.

"Well, I can't help doing that," said Clay.  "That is one of the few
privileges that is left to a man in my position--it doesn't matter what
I say.  That is the advantage of being of no account and hopelessly
detrimental.  The eligible men of the world, you see, have to be so
very careful.  A Prime Minister, for instance, can't talk as he wishes,
and call names if he wants to, or write letters, even.  Whatever he
says is so important, because he says it, that he must be very
discreet.  I am so unimportant that no one minds what I say, and so I
say it.  It's the only comfort I have."

"Are you in the habit of going around the world saying whatever you
choose to every woman you happen to--to--" Miss Langham hesitated.

"To admire very much," suggested Clay.

"To meet," corrected Miss Langham.  "Because, if you are, it is a very
dangerous and selfish practice, and I think your theory of
non-responsibility is a very wicked one."

"Well, I wouldn't say it to a child," mused Clay, "but to one who must
have heard it before--"

"And who, you think, would like to hear it again, perhaps," interrupted
Miss Langham.

"No, not at all," said Clay.  "I don't say it to give her pleasure, but
because it gives me pleasure to say what I think."

"If we are to continue good friends, Mr. Clay," said Miss Langham, in
decisive tones, "we must keep our relationship on more of a social and
less of a personal basis.  It was all very well that first night I met
you," she went on, in a kindly tone.

"You rushed in then and by a sort of tour de force made me think a
great deal about myself and also about you.  Your stories of cherished
photographs and distant devotion and all that were very interesting;
but now we are to be together a great deal, and if we are to talk about
ourselves all the time, I for one shall grow very tired of it.  As a
matter of fact you don't know what your feelings are concerning me, and
until you do we will talk less about them and more about the things you
are certain of. When are you going to take us to the mines, for
instance, and who was Anduella, the Liberator of Olancho, on that
pedestal over there?  Now, isn't that much more instructive?"

Clay smiled grimly and made no answer, but sat with knitted brows
looking out across the trees of the plaza.  His face was so serious and
he was apparently giving such earnest consideration to what she had
said that Miss Langham felt an uneasy sense of remorse.  And, moreover,
the young man's profile, as he sat looking away from her, was very
fine, and the head on his broad shoulders was as well-modelled as the
head of an Athenian statue.

Miss Langham was not insensible to beauty of any sort, and she regarded
the profile with perplexity and with a softening spirit.

"You understand," she said, gently, being quite certain that she did
not understand this new order of young man herself. "You are not
offended with me?" she asked.

Clay turned and frowned, and then smiled in a puzzled way and stretched
out his hand toward the equestrian statue in the plaza.

"Andulla or Anduella, the Treaty-Maker, as they call him, was born in
1700," he said; "he was a most picturesque sort of a chap, and freed
this country from the yoke of Spain.  One of the stories they tell of
him gives you a good idea of his character."  And so, without any
change of expression or reference to what had just passed between them,
Clay continued through the remainder of their stay on the balcony to
discourse in humorous, graphic phrases on the history of Olancho, its
heroes, and its revolutions, the buccaneers and pirates of the old
days, and the concession-hunters and filibusters of the present.  It
was some time before Miss Langham was able to give him her full
attention, for she was considering whether he could be so foolish as to
have taken offence at what she said, and whether he would speak of it
again, and in wondering whether a personal basis for conversation was
not, after all, more entertaining than anecdotes of the victories and
heroism of dead and buried Spaniards.

"That Captain Stuart," said Hope to her sister, as they drove home
together through the moonlight, "I like him very much.  He seems to
have such a simple idea of what is right and good.  It is like a child
talking.  Why, I am really much older than he is in everything but
years--why is that?"

"I suppose it's because we always talk before you as though you were a
grown-up person," said her sister.  "But I agree with you about Captain
Stuart; only, why is he down here?  If he is a gentleman, why is he not
in his own army?  Was he forced to leave it?"

"Oh, he seems to have a very good position here," said Mr. Langham.
"In England, at his age, he would be only a second-lieutenant.  Don't
you remember what the President said, that he would trust him with the
command of his army?  That's certainly a responsible position, and it
shows great confidence in him."

"Not so great, it seems to me," said King, carelessly, "as he is
showing him in making him the guardian of his hearth and home. Did you
hear what he said to-day?  'He guards my home and my family.'  I don't
think a man's home and family are among the things he can afford to
leave to the protection of stray English subalterns.  From all I hear,
it would be better if President Alvarez did less plotting and protected
his own house himself."

"The young man did not strike me as the sort of person," said Mr.
Langham, warmly, "who would be likely to break his word to the man who
is feeding him and sheltering him, and whose uniform he wears.  I don't
think the President's home is in any danger from within.  Madame
Alvarez--"

Clay turned suddenly in his place on the box-seat of the carriage,
where he had been sitting, a silent, misty statue in the moonlight, and
peered down on those in the carriage below him.

"Madame Alvarez needs no protection, as you were about to say, Mr.
Langham," he interrupted, quickly.  "Those who know her could say
nothing against her, and those who do not know her would not so far
forget themselves as to dare to do it.  Have you noticed the effect of
the moonlight on the walls of the convent?" he continued, gently.  "It
makes them quite white."

"No," exclaimed Mr. Langham and King, hurriedly, as they both turned
and gazed with absorbing interest at the convent on the hills above
them.

Before the sisters went to sleep that night Hope came to the door of
her sister's room and watched Alice admiringly as she sat before the
mirror brushing out her hair.

"I think it's going to be fine down here; don't you, Alice?" she asked.
"Everything is so different from what it is at home, and so beautiful,
and I like the men we've met.  Isn't that Mr. MacWilliams funny--and he
is so tough.  And Captain Stuart--it is a pity he's shy.  The only
thing he seems to be able to talk about is Mr. Clay.  He worships Mr.
Clay!"

"Yes," assented her sister, "I noticed on the balcony that you seemed
to have found some way to make him speak."

"Well, that was it.  He likes to talk about Mr. Clay, and I wanted to
listen.  Oh! he is a fine man.  He has done more exciting things--"

"Who?  Captain Stuart?"

"No--Mr. Clay.  He's been in three real wars and about a dozen little
ones, and he's built thousands of miles of railroads, I don't know how
many thousands, but Captain Stuart knows; and he built the highest
bridge in Peru.  It swings in the air across a chasm, and it rocks when
the wind blows.  And the German Emperor made him a Baron."

"Why?"

"I don't know.  I couldn't understand.  It was something about plans
for fortifications.  He, Mr. Clay, put up a fort in the harbor of Rio
Janeiro during a revolution, and the officers on a German man-of-war
saw it and copied the plans, and the Germans built one just like it,
only larger, on the Baltic, and when the Emperor found out whose design
it was, he sent Mr. Clay the order of something-or-other, and made him
a Baron."

"Really," exclaimed the elder sister, "isn't he afraid that some one
will marry him for his title?"

"Oh, well, you can laugh, but I think it's pretty fine, and so does
Ted," added Hope, with the air of one who propounds a final argument.

"Oh, I beg your pardon," laughed Alice.  "If Ted approves we must all
go down and worship."

"And father, too," continued Hope.  "He said he thought Mr. Clay was
one of the most remarkable men for his years that he had ever met."

Miss Langham's eyes were hidden by the masses of her black hair that
she had shaken over her face, and she said nothing.

"And I liked the way he shut Reggie King up too," continued Hope,
stoutly, "when he and father were talking that way about Madame
Alvarez."

"Yes, upon my word," exclaimed her sister, impatiently tossing her hair
back over her shoulders.  "I really cannot see that Madame Alvarez is
in need of any champion.  I thought Mr. Clay made it very much worse by
rushing in the way he did.  Why should he take it upon himself to
correct a man as old as my father?"

"I suppose because Madame Alvarez is a friend of his," Hope answered.

"My dear child, a beautiful woman can always find some man to take her
part," said Miss Langham.  "But I've no doubt," she added, rising and
kissing her sister good-night, "that he is all that your Captain Stuart
thinks him; but he is not going to keep us awake any longer, is he,
even if he does show such gallant interest in old ladies?"

"Old ladies!" exclaimed Hope in amazement.

"Why, Alice!"

But her sister only laughed and waved her out of the room, and Hope
walked away frowning in much perplexity.



V

The visit to the city was imitated on the three succeeding evenings by
similar excursions.  On one night they returned to the plaza, and the
other two were spent in drifting down the harbor and along the coast on
King's yacht.  The President and Madame Alvarez were King's guests on
one of these moonlight excursions, and were saluted by the proper
number of guns, and their native band played on the forward deck.  Clay
felt that King held the centre of the stage for the time being, and
obliterated himself completely.  He thought of his own paddle-wheel
tug-boat that he had had painted and gilded in her honor, and smiled
grimly.

MacWilliams approached him as he sat leaning back on the rail and
looking up, with the eye of a man who had served before the mast, at
the lacework of spars and rigging above him.  MacWilliams came toward
him on tiptoe and dropped carefully into a wicker chair. "There don't
seem to be any door-mats on this boat," he said. "In every other
respect she seems fitted out quite complete; all the latest magazines
and enamelled bathtubs, and Chinese waiter-boys with cock-tails up
their sleeves.  But there ought to be a mat at the top of each of those
stairways that hang over the side, otherwise some one is sure to soil
the deck.  Have you been down in the engine-room yet?" he asked. "Well,
don't go, then," he advised, solemnly.  "It will only make you feel
badly.  I have asked the Admiral if I can send those half-breed engine
drivers over to-morrow to show them what a clean engine-room looks
like.  I've just been talking to the chief.  His name's MacKenzie, and
I told him I was Scotch myself, and he said it 'was a greet pleesure'
to find a gentleman so well acquainted with the movements of machinery.
He thought I was one of King's friends, I guess, so I didn't tell him I
pulled a lever for a living myself.  I gave him a cigar though, and he
said, 'Thankee, sir,' and touched his cap to me."

MacWilliams chuckled at the recollection, and crossed his legs
comfortably.  "One of King's cigars, too," he said.  "Real Havana; he
leaves them lying around loose in the cabin.  Have you had one?  Ted
Langham and I took about a box between us."

Clay made no answer, and MacWilliams settled himself contentedly in the
great wicker chair and puffed grandly on a huge cigar.

"It's demoralizing, isn't it?" he said at last.

"What?" asked Clay, absently.

"Oh, this associating with white people again, as we're doing now.  It
spoils you for tortillas and rice, doesn't it?  It's going to be great
fun while it lasts, but when they've all gone, and Ted's gone, too, and
the yacht's vanished, and we fall back to tramping around the plaza
twice a week, it won't be gay, will it?  No; it won't be gay.  We're
having the spree of our lives now, I guess, but there's going to be a
difference in the morning."

"Oh, it's worth a headache, I think," said Clay, as he shrugged his
shoulders and walked away to find Miss Langham.

The day set for the visit to the mines rose bright and clear.
MacWilliams had rigged out his single passenger-car with rugs and
cushions, and flags flew from its canvas top that flapped and billowed
in the wind of the slow-moving train.  Their observation-car, as
MacWilliams termed it, was placed in front of the locomotive, and they
were pushed gently along the narrow rails between forests of Manaca
palms, and through swamps and jungles, and at times over the limestone
formation along the coast, where the waves dashed as high as the
smokestack of the locomotive, covering the excursionists with a
sprinkling of white spray.  Thousands of land-crabs, painted red and
black and yellow, scrambled with a rattle like dead men's bones across
the rails to be crushed by the hundreds under the wheels of the
Juggernaut; great lizards ran from sunny rocks at the sound of their
approach, and a deer bounded across the tracks fifty feet in front of
the cow-catcher.  MacWilliams escorted Hope out into the cab of the
locomotive, and taught her how to increase and slacken the speed of the
engine, until she showed an unruly desire to throw the lever open
altogether and shoot them off the rails into the ocean beyond.

Clay sat at the back of the car with Miss Langham, and told her and her
father of the difficulties with which young MacWilliams had had to
contend.  Miss Langham found her chief pleasure in noting the attention
which her father gave to all that Clay had to tell him.  Knowing her
father as she did, and being familiar with his manner toward other men,
she knew that he was treating Clay with unusual consideration.  And
this pleased her greatly, for it justified her own interest in him.
She regarded Clay as a discovery of her own, but she was glad to have
her opinion of him shared by others.

Their coming was a great event in the history of the mines. Kirkland,
the foreman, and Chapman, who handled the dynamite, Weimer, the Consul,
and the native doctor, who cared for the fever-stricken and the
casualties, were all at the station to meet them in the whitest of
white duck and with a bunch of ponies to carry them on their tour of
inspection, and the village of mud-cabins and zinc-huts that stood
clear of the bare sunbaked earth on whitewashed wooden piles was as
clean as Clay's hundred policemen could sweep it.  Mr. Langham rode in
advance of the cavalcade, and the head of each of the different
departments took his turn in riding at his side, and explained what had
been done, and showed him the proud result.  The village was empty,
except for the families of the native workmen and the ownerless dogs,
the scavengers of the colony, that snarled and barked and ran leaping
in front of the ponies' heads.

Rising abruptly above the zinc village, lay the first of the five great
hills, with its open front cut into great terraces, on which the men
clung like flies on the side of a wall, some of them in groups around
an opening, or in couples pounding a steel bar that a fellow-workman
turned in his bare hands, while others gathered about the panting
steam-drills that shook the solid rock with fierce, short blows, and
hid the men about them in a throbbing curtain of steam.  Self-important
little dummy-engines, dragging long trains of ore-cars, rolled and
rocked on the uneven surface of the ground, and swung around corners
with warning screeches of their whistles.  They could see, on peaks
outlined against the sky, the signal-men waving their red flags, and
then plunging down the mountain-side out of danger, as the earth
rumbled and shook and vomited out a shower of stones and rubbish into
the calm hot air.  It was a spectacle of desperate activity and
puzzling to the uninitiated, for it seemed to be scattered over an
unlimited extent, with no head nor direction, and with each man, or
each group of men, working alone, like rag-pickers on a heap of ashes.

After the first half-hour of curious interest Miss Langham admitted to
herself that she was disappointed.  She confessed she had hoped that
Clay would explain the meaning of the mines to her, and act as her
escort over the mountains which he was blowing into pieces.

But it was King, somewhat bored by the ceaseless noise and heat, and
her brother, incoherently enthusiastic, who rode at her side, while
Clay moved on in advance and seemed to have forgotten her existence.
She watched him pointing up at the openings in the mountains and down
at the ore-road, or stooping to pick up a piece of ore from the ground
in cowboy fashion, without leaving his saddle, and pounding it on the
pommel before he passed it to the others.  And, again, he would stand
for minutes at a time up to his boot-tops in the sliding waste, with
his bridle rein over his arm and his thumbs in his belt, listening to
what his lieutenants were saying, and glancing quickly from them to Mr.
Langham to see if he were following the technicalities of their speech.
All of the men who had welcomed the appearance of the women on their
arrival with such obvious delight and with so much embarrassment seemed
now as oblivious of their presence as Clay himself.

Miss Langham pushed her horse up into the group beside Hope, who had
kept her pony close at Clay's side from the beginning; but she could
not make out what it was they were saying, and no one seemed to think
it necessary to explain.  She caught Clay's eye at last and smiled
brightly at him; but, after staring at her for fully a minute, until
Kirkland had finished speaking, she heard him say, "Yes, that's it
exactly; in open-face workings there is no other way," and so showed
her that he had not been even conscious of her presence.  But a few
minutes later she saw him look up at Hope, folding his arms across his
chest tightly and shaking his head.  "You see it was the only thing to
do," she heard him say, as though he were defending some course of
action, and as though Hope were one of those who must be convinced.
"If we had cut the opening on the first level, there was the danger of
the whole thing sinking in, so we had to begin to clear away at the top
and work down.  That's why I ordered the bucket-trolley.  As it turned
out, we saved money by it."

Hope nodded her head slightly.  "That's what I told father when Ted
wrote us about it," she said; "but you haven't done it at Mount
Washington."

"Oh, but it's like this, Miss--" Kirkland replied, eagerly. "It's
because Washington is a solider foundation.  We can cut openings all
over it and they won't cave, but this hill is most all rubbish; it's
the poorest stuff in the mines."

Hope nodded her head again and crowded her pony on after the moving
group, but her sister and King did not follow.  King looked at her and
smiled.  "Hope is very enthusiastic," he said.  "Where did she pick it
up?"

"Oh, she and father used to go over it in his study last winter after
Ted came down here," Miss Langham answered, with a touch of impatience
in her tone.  "Isn't there some place where we can go to get out of
this heat?"

Weimer, the Consul, heard her and led her back to Kirkland's bungalow,
that hung like an eagle's nest from a projecting cliff. From its porch
they could look down the valley over the greater part of the mines, and
beyond to where the Caribbean Sea lay flashing in the heat.

"I saw very few Americans down there, Weimer," said King.  "I thought
Clay had imported a lot of them."

"About three hundred altogether, wild Irishmen and negroes," said the
Consul; "but we use the native soldiers chiefly.  They can stand the
climate better, and, besides," he added, "they act as a reserve in case
of trouble.  They are Mendoza's men, and Clay is trying to win them
away from him."

"I don't understand," said King.

Weimer looked around him and waited until Kirkland's servant had
deposited a tray full of bottles and glasses on a table near them, and
had departed.  "The talk is," he said, "that Alvarez means to proclaim
a dictatorship in his own favor before the spring elections.  You've
heard of that, haven't you?" King shook his head.

"Oh, tell us about it," said Miss Langham; "I should so like to be in
plots and conspiracies."

"Well, they're rather common down here," continued the Consul, "but
this one ought to interest you especially, Miss Langham, because it is
a woman who is at the head of it.  Madame Alvarez, you know, was the
Countess Manueleta Hernandez before her marriage.  She belongs to one
of the oldest families in Spain.  Alvarez married her in Madrid, when
he was Minister there, and when he returned to run for President, she
came with him.  She's a tremendously ambitious woman, and they do say
she wants to convert the republic into a monarchy, and make her husband
King, or, more properly speaking, make herself Queen.  Of course that's
absurd, but she is supposed to be plotting to turn Olancho into a sort
of dependency of Spain, as it was long ago, and that's why she is so
unpopular."

"Indeed?" interrupted Miss Langham, "I did not know that she was
unpopular."

"Oh, rather.  Why, her party is called the Royalist Party already, and
only a week before you came the Liberals plastered the city with
denunciatory placards against her, calling on the people to drive her
out of the country."

"What cowards--to fight a woman!" exclaimed Miss Langham.

"Well, she began it first, you see," said the Consul.

"Who is the leader of the fight against her?" asked King.

"General Mendoza; he is commander-in-chief and has the greater part of
the army with him, but the other candidate, old General Rojas, is the
popular choice and the best of the three. He is Vice-President now, and
if the people were ever given a fair chance to vote for the man they
want, he would unquestionably be the next President.  The mass of the
people are sick of revolutions.  They've had enough of them, but they
will have to go through another before long, and if it turns against
Dr. Alvarez, I'm afraid Mr. Langham will have hard work to hold these
mines.  You see, Mendoza has already threatened to seize the whole
plant and turn it into a Government monopoly."

"And if the other one, General Rojas, gets into power, will he seize
the mines, too?"

"No, he is honest, strange to relate," laughed Weimer, "but he won't
get in.  Alvarez will make himself dictator, or Mendoza will make
himself President.  That's why Clay treats the soldiers here so well.
He thinks he may need them against Mendoza.  You may be turning your
saluting-gun on the city yet, Commodore," he added, smiling, "or, what
is more likely, you'll need the yacht to take Miss Langham and the rest
of the family out of the country."

King smiled and Miss Langham regarded Weimer with flattering interest.
"I've got a quick firing gun below decks," said King, "that I used in
the Malaysian Peninsula on a junkful of Black Flags, and I think I'll
have it brought up.  And there are about thirty of my men on the yacht
who wouldn't ask for their wages in a year if I'd let them go on shore
and mix up in a fight.  When do you suppose this--"

A heavy step and the jingle of spurs on the bare floor of the bungalow
startled the conspirators, and they turned and gazed guiltily out at
the mountain-tops above them as Clay came hurrying out upon the porch.

"They told me you were here," he said, speaking to Miss Langham.  "I'm
so sorry it tired you.  I should have remembered--it is a rough trip
when you're not used to it," he added, remorsefully.  "But I'm glad
Weimer was here to take care of you."

"It was just a trifle hot and noisy," said Miss Langham, smiling
sweetly.  She put her hand to her forehead with an expression of
patient suffering.  "It made my head ache a little, but it was most
interesting."  She added, "You are certainly to be congratulated on
your work."

Clay glanced at her doubtfully with a troubled look, and turned away
his eyes to the busy scene below him.  He was greatly hurt that she
should have cared so little, and indignant at himself for being so
unjust.  Why should he expect a woman to find interest in that hive of
noise and sweating energy?  But even as he stood arguing with himself
his eyes fell on a slight figure sitting erect and graceful on her
pony's back, her white habit soiled and stained red with the ore of the
mines, and green where it had crushed against the leaves.  She was
coming slowly up the trail with a body-guard of half a dozen men
crowding closely around her, telling her the difficulties of the work,
and explaining their successes, and eager for a share of her quick
sympathy.

Clay's eyes fixed themselves on the picture, and he smiled at its
significance.  Miss Langham noticed the look, and glanced below to see
what it was that had so interested him, and then back at him again.  He
was still watching the approaching cavalcade intently, and smiling to
himself.  Miss Langham drew in her breath and raised her head and
shoulders quickly, like a deer that hears a footstep in the forest, and
when Hope presently stepped out upon the porch, she turned quickly
toward her, and regarded her steadily, as though she were a stranger to
her, and as though she were trying to see her with the eyes of one who
looked at her for the first time.

"Hope!" she said, "do look at your dress!"

Hope's face was glowing with the unusual exercise, and her eyes were
brilliant.  Her hair had slipped down beneath the visor of her helmet.

"I am so tired--and so hungry."  She was laughing and looking directly
at Clay.  "It has been a wonderful thing to have seen," she said,
tugging at her heavy gauntlet, "and to have done," she added.  She
pulled off her glove and held out her hand to Clay, moist and scarred
with the pressure of the reins.

"Thank you," she said, simply.

The master of the mines took it with a quick rush of gratitude, and
looking into the girl's eyes, saw something there that startled him, so
that he glanced quickly past her at the circle of booted men grouped in
the door behind her.  They were each smiling in appreciation of the
tableau; her father and Ted, MacWilliams and Kirkland, and all the
others who had helped him. They seemed to envy, but not to grudge, the
whole credit which the girl had given to him.

Clay thought, "Why could it not have been the other?"  But he said
aloud, "Thank YOU.  You have given me my reward."

Miss Langham looked down impatiently into the valley below, and found
that it seemed more hot and noisy, and more grimy than before.



VI

Clay believed that Alice Langham's visit to the mines had opened his
eyes fully to vast differences between them.  He laughed and railed at
himself for having dared to imagine that he was in a position to care
for her.  Confident as he was at times, and sure as he was of his
ability in certain directions, he was uneasy and fearful when he
matched himself against a man of gentle birth and gentle breeding, and
one who, like King, was part of a world of which he knew little, and to
which, in his ignorance concerning it, he attributed many advantages
that it did not possess.  He believed that he would always lack the
mysterious something which these others held by right of inheritance.
He was still young and full of the illusions of youth, and so gave
false values to his own qualities, and values equally false to the
qualities he lacked.  For the next week he avoided Miss Langham, unless
there were other people present, and whenever she showed him special
favor, he hastily recalled to his mind her failure to sympathize in his
work, and assured himself that if she could not interest herself in the
engineer, he did not care to have her interested in the man.  Other
women had found him attractive in himself; they had cared for his
strength of will and mind, and because he was good to look at.  But he
determined that this one must sympathize with his work in the world, no
matter how unpicturesque it might seem to her.  His work was the best
of him, he assured himself, and he would stand or fall with it.

It was a week after the visit to the mines that President Alvarez gave
a great ball in honor of the Langhams, to which all of the important
people of Olancho, and the Foreign Ministers were invited.  Miss
Langham met Clay on the afternoon of the day set for the ball, as she
was going down the hill to join Hope and her father at dinner on the
yacht.

"Are you not coming, too?" she asked.

"I wish I could," Clay answered.  "King asked me, but a steamer-load of
new machinery arrived to-day, and I have to see it through the
Custom-House."

Miss Langham gave an impatient little laugh, and shook her head. "You
might wait until we were gone before you bother with your machinery,"
she said.

"When you are gone I won't be in a state of mind to attend to machinery
or anything else," Clay answered.

Miss Langham seemed so far encouraged by this speech that she seated
herself in the boathouse at the end of the wharf.  She pushed her
mantilla back from her face and looked up at him, smiling brightly.

"'The time has come, the walrus said,'" she quoted, "'to talk of many
things.'"

Clay laughed and dropped down beside her.  "Well?" he said.

"You have been rather unkind to me this last week," the girl began,
with her eyes fixed steadily on his.  "And that day at the mines when I
counted on you so, you acted abominably."

Clay's face showed so plainly his surprise at this charge, which he
thought he only had the right to make, that Miss Langham stopped.

"I don't understand," said Clay, quietly.  "How did I treat you
abominably?"

He had taken her so seriously that Miss Langham dropped her lighter
tone and spoke in one more kindly:

"I went out there to see your work at its best.  I was only interested
in going because it was your work, and because it was you who had done
it all, and I expected that you would try to explain it to me and help
me to understand, but you didn't.  You treated me as though I had no
interest in the matter at all, as though I was not capable of
understanding it.  You did not seem to care whether I was interested or
not.  In fact, you forgot me altogether."

Clay exhibited no evidence of a reproving conscience.  "I am sorry you
had a stupid time," he said, gravely.

"I did not mean that, and you know I didn't mean that," the girl
answered.  "I wanted to hear about it from you, because you did it.  I
wasn't interested so much in what had been done, as I was in the man
who had accomplished it."

Clay shrugged his shoulders impatiently, and looked across at Miss
Langham with a troubled smile.

"But that's just what I don't want," he said.  "Can't you see? These
mines and other mines like them are all I have in the world.  They are
my only excuse for having lived in it so long. I want to feel that I've
done something outside of myself, and when you say that you like me
personally, it's as little satisfaction to me as it must be to a woman
to be congratulated on her beauty, or on her fine voice.  That is
nothing she has done herself.  I should like you to value what I have
done, not what I happen to be."

Miss Langham turned her eyes to the harbor, and it was some short time
before she answered.

"You are a very difficult person to please," she said, "and most
exacting.  As a rule men are satisfied to be liked for any reason.  I
confess frankly, since you insist upon it, that I do not rise to the
point of appreciating your work as the others do.  I suppose it is a
fault," she continued, with an air that plainly said that she
considered it, on the contrary, something of a virtue.  "And if I knew
more about it technically, I might see more in it to admire.  But I am
looking farther on for better things from you.  The friends who help us
the most are not always those who consider us perfect, are they?" she
asked, with a kindly smile.  She raised her eyes to the great ore-pier
that stretched out across the water, the one ugly blot in the scene of
natural beauty about them.  "I think that is all very well," she said;
"but I certainly expect you to do more than that.  I have met many
remarkable men in all parts of the world, and I know what a strong man
is, and you have one of the strongest personalities I have known.  But
you can't mean that you are content to stop with this.  You should be
something bigger and more wide-reaching and more lasting.  Indeed, it
hurts me to see you wasting your time here over my father's interests.
You should exert that same energy on a broader map.  You could make
yourself anything you chose.  At home you would be your party's leader
in politics, or you could be a great general, or a great financier.  I
say this because I know there are better things in you, and because I
want you to make the most of your talents.  I am anxious to see you put
your powers to something worth while."

Miss Langham's voice carried with it such a tone of sincerity that she
almost succeeded in deceiving herself.  And yet she would have hardly
cared to explain just why she had reproached the man before her after
this fashion.  For she knew that when she spoke as she had done, she
was beating about to find some reason that would justify her in not
caring for him, as she knew she could care--as she would not allow
herself to care.  The man at her side had won her interest from the
first, and later had occupied her thoughts so entirely, that it
troubled her peace of mind.  Yet she would not let her feeling for him
wax and grow stronger, but kept it down.  And she was trying now to
persuade herself that she did this because there was something lacking
in him and not in her.

She was almost angry with him for being so much to her and for not
being more acceptable in little things, like the other men she knew.
So she found this fault with him in order that she might justify her
own lack of feeling.

But Clay, who only heard the words and could not go back of them to
find the motive, could not know this.  He sat perfectly still when she
had finished and looked steadily out across the harbor.  His eyes fell
on the ugly ore-pier, and he winced and uttered a short grim laugh.

"That's true, what you say," he began, "I haven't done much. You are
quite right.  Only--" he looked up at her curiously and smiled--"only
you should not have been the one to tell me of it."

Miss Langham had been so far carried away by her own point of view that
she had not considered Clay, and now that she saw what mischief she had
done, she gave a quick gasp of regret, and leaned forward as though to
add some explanation to what she had said.  But Clay stopped her.  "I
mean by that," he said, "that the great part of the inspiration I have
had to do what little I have done came from you.  You were a sort of
promise of something better to me.  You were more of a type than an
individual woman, but your picture, the one I carry in my watch, meant
all that part of life that I have never known, the sweetness and the
nobleness and grace of civilization,--something I hoped I would some
day have time to enjoy.  So you see," he added, with an uncertain
laugh, "it's less pleasant to hear that I have failed to make the most
of myself from you than from almost any one else."

"But, Mr. Clay," protested the girl, anxiously, "I think you have done
wonderfully well.  I only said that I wanted you to do more.  You are
so young and you have--"

Clay did not hear her.  He was leaning forward looking moodily out
across the water, with his folded arms clasped across his knees.

"I have not made the most of myself," he repeated; "that is what you
said."  He spoke the words as though she had delivered a sentence.
"You don't think well of what I have done, of what I am."

He drew in his breath and shook his head with a hopeless laugh, and
leaned back against the railing of the boat-house with the weariness in
his attitude of a man who has given up after a long struggle.

"No," he said with a bitter flippancy in his voice, "I don't amount to
much.  But, my God!" he laughed, and turning his head away, "when you
think what I was!  This doesn't seem much to you, and it doesn't seem
much to me now that I have your point of view on it, but when I
remember!"  Clay stopped again and pressed his lips together and shook
his head.  His half-closed eyes, that seemed to be looking back into
his past, lighted as they fell on King's white yacht, and he raised his
arm and pointed to it with a wave of the hand.  "When I was sixteen I
was a sailor before the mast," he said, "the sort of sailor that King's
crew out there wouldn't recognize in the same profession.  I was of so
little account that I've been knocked the length of the main deck at
the end of the mate's fist, and left to lie bleeding in the scuppers
for dead.  I hadn't a thing to my name then but the clothes I wore, and
I've had to go aloft in a hurricane and cling to a swinging rope with
my bare toes and pull at a wet sheet until my finger-nails broke and
started in their sockets; and I've been a cowboy, with no companions
for six months of the year but eight thousand head of cattle and men as
dumb and untamed as the steers themselves.  I've sat in my saddle night
after night, with nothing overhead but the stars, and no sound but the
noise of the steers breathing in their sleep.  The women I knew were
Indian squaws, and the girls of the sailors' dance-houses and the
gambling-hells of Sioux City and Abilene, and Callao and Port Said.
That was what I was and those were my companions.  Why!" he laughed,
rising and striding across the boat-house with his hands locked behind
him, "I've fought on the mud floor of a Mexican shack, with a naked
knife in my hand, for my last dollar.  I was as low and as desperate as
that.  And now--" Clay lifted his head and smiled.  "Now," he said, in
a lower voice and addressing Miss Langham with a return of his usual
grave politeness, "I am able to sit beside you and talk to you.  I have
risen to that.  I am quite content."

He paused and looked at Miss Langham uncertainly for a few moments as
though in doubt as to whether she would understand him if he continued.

"And though it means nothing to you," he said, "and though as you say I
am here as your father's employee, there are other places, perhaps,
where I am better known.  In Edinburgh or Berlin or Paris, if you were
to ask the people of my own profession, they could tell you something
of me.  If I wished it, I could drop this active work tomorrow and
continue as an adviser, as an expert, but I like the active part
better.  I like doing things myself.  I don't say, 'I am a salaried
servant of Mr. Langham's;' I put it differently.  I say, 'There are
five mountains of iron. You are to take them up and transport them from
South America to North America, where they will be turned into
railroads and ironclads.'  That's my way of looking at it.  It's better
to bind a laurel to the plough than to call yourself hard names.  It
makes your work easier--almost noble.  Cannot you see it that way, too?"

Before Miss Langham could answer, a deprecatory cough from one side of
the open boat-house startled them, and turning they saw MacWilliams
coming toward them.  They had been so intent upon what Clay was saying
that he had approached them over the soft sand of the beach without
their knowing it.  Miss Langham welcomed his arrival with evident
pleasure.

"The launch is waiting for you at the end of the pier," MacWilliams
said.  Miss Langham rose and the three walked together down the length
of the wharf, MacWilliams moving briskly in advance in order to enable
them to continue the conversation he had interrupted, but they followed
close behind him, as though neither of them were desirous of such an
opportunity.

Hope and King had both come for Miss Langham, and while the latter was
helping her to a place on the cushions, and repeating his regrets that
the men were not coming also, Hope started the launch, with a brisk
ringing of bells and a whirl of the wheel and a smile over her shoulder
at the figures on the wharf.

"Why didn't you go?" said Clay; "you have no business at the
Custom-House."

"Neither have you," said MacWilliams.  "But I guess we both understand.
There's no good pushing your luck too far."

"What do you mean by that--this time?"

"Why, what have we to do with all of this?" cried MacWilliams. "It's
what I keep telling you every day.  We're not in that class, and you're
only making it harder for yourself when they've gone.  I call it
cruelty to animals myself, having women like that around.  Up North,
where everybody's white, you don't notice it so much, but down
here--Lord!"

"That's absurd," Clay answered.  "Why should you turn your back on
civilization when it comes to you, just because you're not going back
to civilization by the next steamer?  Every person you meet either
helps you or hurts you.  Those girls help us, even if they do make the
life here seem bare and mean."

"Bare and mean!" repeated MacWilliams incredulously.  "I think that's
just what they don't do.  I like it all the better because they're
mixed up in it.  I never took so much interest in your mines until she
took to riding over them, and I didn't think great shakes of my old
ore-road, either, but now that she's got to acting as engineer, it's
sort of nickel-plated the whole outfit.  I'm going to name the new
engine after her--when it gets here--if her old man will let me."

"What do you mean?  Miss Langham hasn't been to the mines but once, has
she?"

"Miss Langham!" exclaimed MacWilliams. "No, I mean the other, Miss
Hope.  She comes out with Ted nearly every day now, and she's learning
how to run a locomotive.  Just for fun, you know," he added,
reassuringly.

"I didn't suppose she had any intention of joining the Brotherhood,"
said Clay.  "So she's been out every day, has she?  I like that," he
commented, enthusiastically.  "She's a fine, sweet girl."

"Fine, sweet girl!" growled MacWilliams.  "I should hope so. She's the
best.  They don't make them any better than that, and just think, if
she's like that now, what will she be when she's grown up, when she's
learned a few things?  Now her sister.  You can see just what her
sister will be at thirty, and at fifty, and at eighty.  She's
thoroughbred and she's the most beautiful woman to look at I ever
saw--but, my son--she is too careful.  She hasn't any illusions, and no
sense of humor.  And a woman with no illusions and no sense of humor is
going to be monotonous.  You can't teach her anything.  You can't
imagine yourself telling her anything she doesn't know.  The things we
think important don't reach her at all.  They're not in her line, and
in everything else she knows more than we could ever guess at.  But
that Miss Hope!  It's a privilege to show her about.  She wants to see
everything, and learn everything, and she goes poking her head into
openings and down shafts like a little fox terrier. And she'll sit
still and listen with her eyes wide open and tears in them, too, and
she doesn't know it--until you can't talk yourself for just looking at
her."

Clay rose and moved on to the house in silence.  He was glad that
MacWilliams had interrupted him when he did.  He wondered whether he
understood Alice Langham after all.  He had seen many fine ladies
before during his brief visits to London, and Berlin, and Vienna, and
they had shown him favor.  He had known other women not so fine.
Spanish-American senoritas through Central and South America, the wives
and daughters of English merchants exiled along the Pacific coast,
whose fair skin and yellow hair whitened and bleached under the hot
tropical suns.  He had known many women, and he could have quoted

    "Trials and troubles amany,
        Have proved me;
      One or two women, God bless them!
        Have loved me."

But the woman he was to marry must have all the things he lacked.

She must fill out and complete him where he was wanting.  This woman
possessed all of these things.  She appealed to every ambition and to
every taste he cherished, and yet he knew that he had hesitated and
mistrusted her, when he should have declared himself eagerly and
vehemently, and forced her to listen with all the strength of his will.


Miss Langham dropped among the soft cushions of the launch with a sense
of having been rescued from herself and of delight in finding refuge
again in her own environment.  The sight of King standing in the bow
beside Hope with his cigarette hanging from his lips, and peering with
half-closed eyes into the fading light, gave her a sense of restfulness
and content.  She did not know what she wished from that other strange
young man.  He was so bold, so handsome, and he looked at life and
spoke of it in such a fresh, unhackneyed spirit.  He might make himself
anything he pleased.  But here was a man who already had everything, or
who could get it as easily as he could increase the speed of the
launch, by pulling some wire with his finger.

She recalled one day when they were all on board of this same launch,
and the machinery had broken down, and MacWilliams had gone forward to
look at it.  He had called Clay to help him, and she remembered how
they had both gone down on their knees and asked the engineer and
fireman to pass them wrenches and oil-cans, while King protested
mildly, and the rest sat helplessly in the hot glare of the sea, as the
boat rose and fell on the waves.  She resented Clay's interest in the
accident, and his pleasure when he had made the machinery right once
more, and his appearance as he came back to them with oily hands and
with his face glowing from the heat of the furnace, wiping his grimy
fingers on a piece of packing.  She had resented the equality with
which he treated the engineer in asking his advice, and it rather
surprised her that the crew saluted him when he stepped into the launch
again that night as though he were the owner.  She had expected that
they would patronize him, and she imagined after this incident that she
detected a shade of difference in the manner of the sailors toward
Clay, as though he had cheapened himself to them--as he had to her.



VII

At ten o'clock that same evening Clay began to prepare himself for the
ball at the Government palace, and MacWilliams, who was not invited,
watched him dress with critical approval that showed no sign of envy.

The better to do honor to the President, Clay had brought out several
foreign orders, and MacWilliams helped him to tie around his neck the
collar of the Red Eagle which the German Emperor had given him, and to
fasten the ribbon and cross of the Star of Olancho across his breast,
and a Spanish Order and the Legion of Honor to the lapel of his coat.
MacWilliams surveyed the effect of the tiny enamelled crosses with his
head on one side, and with the same air of affectionate pride and
concern that a mother shows over her daughter's first ball-dress.

"Got any more?" he asked, anxiously.

"I have some war medals," Clay answered, smiling doubtfully. "But I'm
not in uniform."

"Oh, that's all right," declared MacWilliams.  "Put 'em on, put 'em all
on.  Give the girls a treat.  Everybody will think they were given for
feats of swimming, anyway; but they will show up well from the front.
Now, then, you look like a drum-major or a conjuring chap."

"I do not," said Clay.  "I look like a French Ambassador, and I hardly
understand how you find courage to speak to me at all."

He went up the hill in high spirits, and found the carriage at the door
and King, Mr. Langham, and Miss Langham sitting waiting for him.  They
were ready to depart, and Miss Langham had but just seated herself in
the carriage when they heard hurrying across the tiled floor a quick,
light step and the rustle of silk, and turning they saw Hope standing
in the doorway, radiant and smiling.  She wore a white frock that
reached to the ground, and that left her arms and shoulders bare.  Her
hair was dressed high upon her head, and she was pulling vigorously at
a pair of long, tan-colored gloves.  The transformation was so
complete, and the girl looked so much older and so stately and
beautiful, that the two young men stared at her in silent admiration
and astonishment.

"Why, Hope!" exclaimed her sister.  "What does this mean?"

Hope stopped in some alarm, and clasped her hair with both hands.

"What is it?" she asked; "is anything wrong?"

"Why, my dear child," said her sister, "you're not thinking of going
with us, are you?"

"Not going?" echoed the younger sister, in dismay.  "Why, Alice, why
not? I was asked."

"But, Hope-- Father," said the elder sister, stepping out of the
carriage and turning to Mr. Langham, "you didn't intend that Hope
should go, did you?  She's not out yet."

"Oh, nonsense," said Hope, defiantly.  But she drew in her breath
quickly and blushed, as she saw the two young men moving away out of
hearing of this family crisis.  She felt that she was being made to
look like a spoiled child.  "It doesn't count down here," she said,
"and I want to go.  I thought you knew I was going all the time.  Marie
made this frock for me on purpose."

"I don't think Hope is old enough," the elder sister said, addressing
her father, "and if she goes to dances here, there's no reason why she
should not go to those at home."

"But I don't want to go to dances at home," interrupted Hope.

Mr. Langham looked exceedingly uncomfortable, and turned appealingly to
his elder daughter.  "What do you think, Alice?" he said, doubtfully.

"I'm sorry," Miss Langham replied, "but I know it would not be at all
proper.  I hate to seem horrid about it, Hope, but indeed you are too
young, and the men here are not the men a young girl ought to meet."

"You meet them, Alice," said Hope, but pulling off her gloves in token
of defeat.

"But, my dear child, I'm fifty years older than you are."

"Perhaps Alice knows best, Hope," Mr. Langham said.  "I'm sorry if you
are disappointed."

Hope held her head a little higher, and turned toward the door.

"I don't mind if you don't wish it, father," she said. "Good-night."
She moved away, but apparently thought better of it, and came back and
stood smiling and nodding to them as they seated themselves in the
carriage.  Mr. Langham leaned forward and said, in a troubled voice,
"We will tell you all about it in the morning.  I'm very sorry.  You
won't be lonely, will you? I'll stay with you if you wish."

"Nonsense!" laughed Hope.  "Why, it's given to you, father; don't
bother about me.  I'll read something or other and go to bed."

"Good-night, Cinderella," King called out to her.

"Good-night, Prince Charming," Hope answered.

Both Clay and King felt that the girl would not mind missing the ball
so much as she would the fact of having been treated like a child in
their presence, so they refrained from any expression of sympathy or
regret, but raised their hats and bowed a little more impressively than
usual as the carriage drove away.

The picture Hope made, as she stood deserted and forlorn on the steps
of the empty house in her new finery, struck Clay as unnecessarily
pathetic.  He felt a strong sense of resentment against her sister and
her father, and thanked heaven devoutly that he was out of their class,
and when Miss Langham continued to express her sorrow that she had been
forced to act as she had done, he remained silent.  It seemed to Clay
such a simple thing to give children pleasure, and to remember that
their woes were always out of all proportion to the cause.  Children,
dumb animals, and blind people were always grouped together in his mind
as objects demanding the most tender and constant consideration.  So
the pleasure of the evening was spoiled for him while he remembered the
hurt and disappointed look in Hope's face, and when Miss Langham asked
him why he was so preoccupied, he told her bluntly that he thought she
had been very unkind to Hope, and that her objections were absurd.

Miss Langham held herself a little more stiffly.  "Perhaps you do not
quite understand, Mr. Clay," she said.  "Some of us have to conform to
certain rules that the people with whom we best like to associate have
laid down for themselves.  If we choose to be conventional, it is
probably because we find it makes life easier for the greater number.
You cannot think it was a pleasant task for me.  But I have given up
things of much more importance than a dance for the sake of
appearances, and Hope herself will see to-morrow that I acted for the
best."

Clay said he trusted so, but doubted it, and by way of re-establishing
himself in Miss Langham's good favor, asked her if she could give him
the next dance.  But Miss Langham was not to be propitiated.

"I'm sorry," she said, "but I believe I am engaged until supper-time.
Come and ask me then, and I'll have one saved for you.  But there is
something you can do," she added.  "I left my fan in the carriage--do
you think you could manage to get it for me without much trouble?"

"The carriage did not wait.  I believe it was sent back," said Clay,
"but I can borrow a horse from one of Stuart's men, and ride back and
get it for you, if you like."

"How absurd!" laughed Miss Langham, but she looked pleased,
notwithstanding.

"Oh, not at all," Clay answered.  He was smiling down at her in some
amusement, and was apparently much entertained at his idea. "Will you
consider it an act of devotion?" he asked.

There was so little of devotion, and so much more of mischief in his
eyes, that Miss Langham guessed he was only laughing at her, and shook
her head.

"You won't go," she said, turning away.  She followed him with her
eyes, however, as he crossed the room, his head and shoulders towering
above the native men and women.  She had never seen him so resplendent,
and she noted, with an eye that considered trifles, the orders, and his
well-fitting white gloves, and his manner of bowing in the Continental
fashion, holding his opera-hat on his thigh, as though his hand rested
on a sword.  She noticed that the little Olanchoans stopped and looked
after him, as he pushed his way among them, and she could see that the
men were telling the women who he was.  Sir Julian Pindar, the old
British Minister, stopped him, and she watched them as they laughed
together over the English war medals on the American's breast, which
Sir Julian touched with his finger.  He called the French Minister and
his pretty wife to look, too, and they all laughed and talked together
in great spirits, and Miss Langham wondered if Clay was speaking in
French to them.

Miss Langham did not enjoy the ball; she felt injured and aggrieved,
and she assured herself that she had been hardly used.

She had only done her duty, and yet all the sympathy had gone to her
sister, who had placed her in a trying position.  She thought it was
most inconsiderate.

Hope walked slowly across the veranda when the others had gone, and
watched the carriage as long as it remained in sight.  Then she threw
herself into a big arm-chair, and looked down upon her pretty frock and
her new dancing-slippers.  She, too, felt badly used.

The moonlight fell all about her, as it had on the first night of their
arrival, a month before, but now it seemed cold and cheerless, and gave
an added sense of loneliness to the silent house.  She did not go
inside to read, as she had promised to do, but sat for the next hour
looking out across the harbor.  She could not blame Alice.  She
considered that Alice always moved by rules and precedents, like a
queen in a game of chess, and she wondered why.  It made life so tame
and uninteresting, and yet people invariably admired Alice, and some
one had spoken of her as the noblest example of the modern gentlewoman.
She was sure she could not grow up to be any thing like that.  She was
quite confident that she was going to disappoint her family.  She
wondered if people would like her better if she were discreet like
Alice, and less like her brother Ted.  If Mr. Clay, for instance, would
like her better?  She wondered if he disapproved of her riding on the
engine with MacWilliams, and of her tearing through the mines on her
pony, and spearing with a lance of sugar-cane at the mongrel curs that
ran to snap at his flanks. She remembered his look of astonished
amusement the day he had caught her in this impromptu pig-sticking, and
she felt herself growing red at the recollection.  She was sure he
thought her a tomboy.  Probably he never thought of her at all.

Hope leaned back in the chair and looked up at the stars above the
mountains and tried to think of any of her heroes and princes in
fiction who had gone through such interesting experiences as had Mr.
Clay.  Some of them had done so, but they were creatures in a book and
this hero was alive, and she knew him, and had probably made him
despise her as a silly little girl who was scolded and sent off to bed
like a disobedient child.  Hope felt a choking in her throat and
something like a tear creep to her eyes: but she was surprised to find
that the fact did not make her ashamed of herself.  She owned that she
was wounded and disappointed, and to make it harder she could not help
picturing Alice and Clay laughing and talking together in some corner
away from the ball-room, while she, who understood him so well, and who
could not find the words to tell him how much she valued what he was
and what he had done, was forgotten and sitting here alone, like
Cinderella, by the empty fireplace.

The picture was so pathetic as Hope drew it, that for a moment she felt
almost a touch of self-pity, but the next she laughed scornfully at her
own foolishness, and rising with an impatient shrug, walked away in the
direction of her room.

But before she had crossed the veranda she was stopped by the sound of
a horse's hoofs galloping over the hard sun-baked road that led from
the city, and before she had stepped forward out of the shadow in which
she stood the horse had reached the steps and his rider had pulled him
back on his haunches and swung himself off before the forefeet had
touched the ground.

Hope had guessed that it was Clay by his riding, and she feared from
his haste that some one of her people were ill.  So she ran anxiously
forward and asked if anything were wrong.

Clay started at her sudden appearance, and gave a short boyish laugh of
pleasure.

"I'm so glad you're still up," he said.  "No, nothing is wrong."  He
stopped in some embarrassment.  He had been moved to return by the fact
that the little girl he knew was in trouble, and now that he was
suddenly confronted by this older and statelier young person, his
action seemed particularly silly, and he was at a loss to explain it in
any way that would not give offence.

"No, nothing is wrong," he repeated.  "I came after something."

Clay had borrowed one of the cloaks the troopers wore at night from the
same man who had lent him the horse, and as he stood bareheaded before
her, with the cloak hanging from his shoulders to the floor and the
star and ribbon across his breast, Hope felt very grateful to him for
being able to look like a Prince or a hero in a book, and to yet remain
her Mr. Clay at the same time.

"I came to get your sister's fan," Clay explained.  "She forgot it."

The young girl looked at him for a moment in surprise and then
straightened herself slightly.  She did not know whether she was the
more indignant with Alice for sending such a man on so foolish an
errand, or with Clay for submitting to such a service.

"Oh, is that it?" she said at last.  "I will go and find you one."  She
gave him a dignified little bow and moved away toward the door, with
every appearance of disapproval.

"Oh, I don't know," she heard Clay say, doubtfully; "I don't have to go
just yet, do I?  May I not stay here a little while?"

Hope stood and looked at him in some perplexity.

"Why, yes," she answered, wonderingly.  "But don't you want to go back?
You came in a great hurry.  And won't Alice want her fan?"

"Oh, she has it by this time.  I told Stuart to find it.  She left it
in the carriage, and the carriage is waiting at the end of the plaza."

"Then why did you come?" asked Hope, with rising suspicion.

"Oh, I don't know," said Clay, helplessly.  "I thought I'd just like a
ride in the moonlight.  I hate balls and dances anyway, don't you?  I
think you were very wise not to go."

Hope placed her hands on the back of the big arm-chair and looked
steadily at him as he stood where she could see his face in the
moonlight.  "You came back," she said, "because they thought I was
crying, and they sent you to see.  Is that it?  Did Alice send you?"
she demanded.

Clay gave a gasp of consternation.

"You know that no one sent me," he said.  "I thought they treated you
abominably, and I wanted to come and say so.  That's all.  And I wanted
to tell you that I missed you very much, and that your not coming had
spoiled the evening for me, and I came also because I preferred to talk
to you than to stay where I was. No one knows that I came to see you.
I said I was going to get the fan, and I told Stuart to find it after
I'd left.  I just wanted to see you, that's all.  But I will go back
again at once."

While he had been speaking Hope had lowered her eyes from his face and
had turned and looked out across the harbor.  There was a strange,
happy tumult in her breast, and she was breathing so rapidly that she
was afraid he would notice it.  She also felt an absurd inclination to
cry, and that frightened her.  So she laughed and turned and looked up
into his face again.  Clay saw the same look in her eyes that he had
seen there the day when she had congratulated him on his work at the
mines.  He had seen it before in the eyes of other women and it
troubled him.  Hope seated herself in the big chair, and Clay tossed
his cloak on the floor at her feet and sat down with his shoulders
against one of the pillars.  He glanced up at her and found that the
look that had troubled him was gone, and that her eyes were now smiling
with excitement and pleasure.

"And did you bring me something from the ball in your pocket to comfort
me," she asked, mockingly.

"Yes, I did," Clay answered, unabashed.  "I brought you some bonbons."

"You didn't, really!" Hope cried, with a shriek of delight. "How absurd
of you!  The sort you pull?"

"The sort you pull," Clay repeated, gravely.  "And also a dance-card,
which is a relic of barbarism still existing in this Southern capital.
It has the arms of Olancho on it in gold, and I thought you might like
to keep it as a souvenir."  He pulled the card from his coat-pocket and
said, "May I have this dance?"

"You may," Hope answered.  "But you wouldn't mind if we sat it out,
would you?"

"I should prefer it," Clay said, as he scrawled his name across the
card.  "It is so crowded inside, and the company is rather mixed."
They both laughed lightly at their own foolishness, and Hope smiled
down upon him affectionately and proudly.  "You may smoke, if you
choose; and would you like something cool to drink?" she asked,
anxiously.  "After your ride, you know," she suggested, with hospitable
intent.  Clay said that he was very comfortable without a drink, but
lighted a cigar and watched her covertly through the smoke, as she sat
smiling happily and quite unconsciously upon the moonlit world around
them.  She caught Clay's eye fixed on her, and laughed lightly.

"What is it?" he said.

"Oh, I was just thinking," Hope replied, "that it was much better to
have a dance come to you, than to go to the dance."

"Does one man and a dance-card and three bonbons constitute your idea
of a ball?"

"Doesn't it?  You see, I am not out yet, I don't know."

"I should think it might depend a good deal upon the man," Clay
suggested.

"That sounds as though you were hinting," said Hope, doubtfully.  "Now
what would I say to that if I were out?"

"I don't know, but don't say it," Clay answered.  "It would probably be
something very unflattering or very forward, and in either case I
should take you back to your chaperon and leave you there."

Hope had not been listening.  Her eyes were fixed on a level with his
tie, and Clay raised his hand to it in some trepidation. "Mr. Clay,"
she began abruptly and leaning eagerly forward, "would you think me
very rude if I asked you what you did to get all those crosses?  I know
they mean something, and I do so want to know what.  Please tell me."

"Oh, those!" said Clay.  "The reason I put them on to-night is because
wearing them is supposed to be a sort of compliment to your host.  I
got in the habit abroad--"

"I didn't ask you that," said Hope, severely.  "I asked you what you
did to get them.  Now begin with the Legion of Honor on the left, and
go right on until you come to the end, and please don't skip anything.
Leave in all the bloodthirsty parts, and please don't be modest."

"Like Othello," suggested Clay.

"Yes," said Hope; "I will be Desdemona."

"Well, Desdemona, it was like this," said Clay, laughing.  "I got that
medal and that star for serving in the Nile campaign, under Wolseley.
After I left Egypt, I went up the coast to Algiers, where I took
service under the French in a most disreputable organization known as
the Foreign Legion--"

"Don't tell me," exclaimed Hope, in delight, "that you have been a
Chasseur d'Afrique!  Not like the man in 'Under Two Flags'?"

"No, not at all like that man," said Clay, emphatically.  "I was just a
plain, common, or garden, sappeur, and I showed the other
good-for-nothings how to dig trenches.  Well, I contaminated the
Foreign Legion for eight months, and then I went to Peru, where I--"

"You're skipping," said Hope.  "How did you get the Legion of Honor?"

"Oh, that?" said Clay.  "That was a gallery play I made once when we
were chasing some Arabs.  They took the French flag away from our
color-bearer, and I got it back again and waved it frantically around
my head until I was quite certain the Colonel had seen me doing it, and
then I stopped as soon as I knew that I was sure of promotion."

"Oh, how can you?" cried Hope.  "You didn't do anything of the sort.
You probably saved the entire regiment."

"Well, perhaps I did," Clay returned.  "Though I don't remember it, and
nobody mentioned it at the time."

"Go on about the others," said Hope.  "And do try to be truthful."

"Well, I got this one from Spain, because I was President of an
International Congress of Engineers at Madrid.  That was the ostensible
reason, but the real reason was because I taught the Spanish
Commissioners to play poker instead of baccarat.  The German Emperor
gave me this for designing a fort, and the Sultan of Zanzibar gave me
this, and no one but the Sultan knows why, and he won't tell.  I
suppose he's ashamed.  He gives them away instead of cigars.  He was
out of cigars the day I called."

"What a lot of places you have seen," sighed Hope.  "I have been in
Cairo and Algiers, too, but I always had to walk about with a
governess, and she wouldn't go to the mosques because she said they
were full of fleas.  We always go to Homburg and Paris in the summer,
and to big hotels in London.  I love to travel, but I don't love to
travel that way, would you?"

"I travel because I have no home," said Clay.  "I'm different from the
chap that came home because all the other places were shut.  I go to
other places because there is no home open."

"What do you mean?" said Hope, shaking her head.  "Why have you no
home?"

"There was a ranch in Colorado that I used to call home," said Clay,
"but they've cut it up into town lots.  I own a plot in the cemetery
outside of the town, where my mother is buried, and I visit that
whenever I am in the States, and that is the only piece of earth
anywhere in the world that I have to go back to."

Hope leaned forward with her hands clasped in front of her and her eyes
wide open.

"And your father?" she said, softly; "is he--is he there, too--"

Clay looked at the lighted end of his cigar as he turned it between his
fingers.

"My father, Miss Hope," he said, "was a filibuster, and went out on the
'Virginius' to help free Cuba, and was shot, against a stone wall.  We
never knew where he was buried."

"Oh, forgive me; I beg your pardon," said Hope.  There was such
distress in her voice that Clay looked at her quickly and saw the tears
in her eyes.  She reached out her hand timidly, and touched for an
instant his own rough, sunburned fist, as it lay clenched on his knee.
"I am so sorry," she said, "so sorry."  For the first time in many
years the tears came to Clay's eyes and blurred the moonlight and the
scene before him, and he sat unmanned and silent before the simple
touch of a young girl's sympathy.

An hour later, when his pony struck the gravel from beneath his hoofs
on the race back to the city, and Clay turned to wave his hand to Hope
in the doorway, she seemed, as she stood with the moonlight falling
about her white figure, like a spirit beckoning the way to a new
paradise.



VIII

Clay reached the President's Palace during the supper-hour, and found
Mr. Langham and his daughter at the President's table. Madame Alvarez
pointed to a place for him beside Alice Langham, who held up her hand
in welcome.  "You were very foolish to rush off like that," she said.

"It wasn't there," said Clay, crowding into the place beside her.

"No, it was here in the carriage all the time.  Captain Stuart found it
for me."

"Oh, he did, did he?" said Clay; "that's why I couldn't find it.  I am
hungry," he laughed, "my ride gave me an appetite." He looked over and
grinned at Stuart, but that gentleman was staring fixedly at the
candles on the table before him, his eyes filled with concern.  Clay
observed that Madame Alvarez was covertly watching the young officer,
and frowning her disapproval at his preoccupation.  So he stretched his
leg under the table and kicked viciously at Stuart's boots.  Old
General Rojas, the Vice-President, who sat next to Stuart, moved
suddenly and then blinked violently at the ceiling with an expression
of patient suffering, but the exclamation which had escaped him brought
Stuart back to the present, and he talked with the woman next him in a
perfunctory manner.

Miss Langham and her father were waiting for their carriage in the
great hall of the Palace as Stuart came up to Clay, and putting his
hand affectionately on his shoulder, began pointing to something
farther back in the hall.  To the night-birds of the streets and the
noisy fiacre drivers outside, and to the crowd of guests who stood on
the high marble steps waiting for their turn to depart, he might have
been relating an amusing anecdote of the ball just over.

"I'm in great trouble, old man," was what he said.  "I must see you
alone to-night.  I'd ask you to my rooms, but they watch me all the
time, and I don't want them to suspect you are in this until they must.
Go on in the carriage, but get out as you pass the Plaza Bolivar and
wait for me by the statue there."

Clay smiled, apparently in great amusement.  "That's very good," he
said.

He crossed over to where King stood surveying the powdered beauties of
Olancho and their gowns of a past fashion, with an intensity of
admiration which would have been suspicious to those who knew his
tastes.  "When we get into the carriage," said Clay, in a low voice,
"we will both call to Stuart that we will see him to-morrow morning at
breakfast."

"All right," assented King.  "What's up?"

Stuart helped Miss Langham into her carriage, and as it moved away King
shouted to him in English to remember that he was breakfasting with him
on the morrow, and Clay called out in Spanish, "Until to-morrow at
breakfast, don't forget."  And Stuart answered, steadily, "Good night
until to-morrow at one."

As their carriage jolted through the dark and narrow street, empty now
of all noise or movement, one of Stuart's troopers dashed by it at a
gallop, with a lighted lantern swinging at his side.  He raised it as
he passed each street crossing, and held it high above his head so that
its light fell upon the walls of the houses at the four corners.  The
clatter of his horse's hoofs had not ceased before another trooper
galloped toward them riding more slowly, and throwing the light of his
lantern over the trunks of the trees that lined the pavements.  As the
carriage passed him, he brought his horse to its side with a jerk of
the bridle, and swung his lantern in the faces of its occupants.

"Who lives?" he challenged.

"Olancho," Clay replied.

"Who answers?"

"Free men," Clay answered again, and pointed at the star on his coat.

The soldier muttered an apology, and striking his heels into his
horse's side, dashed noisily away, his lantern tossing from side to
side, high in the air, as he drew rein to scan each tree and passed
from one lamp-post to the next.

"What does that mean?" said Mr. Langham; "did he take us for
highwaymen?"

"It is the custom," said Clay.  "We are out rather late, you see."

"If I remember rightly, Clay," said King, "they gave a ball at Brussels
on the eve of Waterloo."

"I believe they did," said Clay, smiling.  He spoke to the driver to
stop the carriage, and stepped down into the street.

"I have to leave you here," he said; "drive on quickly, please; I can
explain better in the morning."

The Plaza Bolivar stood in what had once been the centre of the
fashionable life of Olancho, but the town had moved farther up the
hill, and it was now far in the suburbs, its walks neglected and its
turf overrun with weeds.  The houses about it had fallen into disuse,
and the few that were still occupied at the time Clay entered it showed
no sign of life.  Clay picked his way over the grass-grown paths to the
statue of Bolivar, the hero of the sister republic of Venezuela, which
still stood on its pedestal in a tangle of underbrush and hanging
vines.  The iron railing that had once surrounded it was broken down,
and the branches of the trees near were black with sleeping buzzards.
Two great palms reared themselves in the moonlight at either side, and
beat their leaves together in the night wind, whispering and murmuring
together like two living conspirators.

"This ought to be safe enough," Clay murmured to himself. "It's just
the place for plotting.  I hope there are no snakes."  He seated
himself on the steps of the pedestal, and lighting a cigar, remained
smoking and peering into the shadows about him, until a shadow blacker
than the darkness rose at his feet, and a voice said, sternly, "Put out
that light.  I saw it half a mile away."

Clay rose and crushed his cigar under his foot.  "Now then, old man,"
he demanded briskly, "what's up?  It's nearly daylight and we must
hurry."

Stuart seated himself heavily on the stone steps, like a man tired in
mind and body, and unfolded a printed piece of paper. Its blank side
was damp and sticky with paste.

"It is too dark for you to see this," he began, in a strained voice,
"so I will translate it to you.  It is an attack on Madame Alvarez and
myself.  They put them up during the ball, when they knew my men would
be at the Palace.  I have had them scouring the streets for the last
two hours tearing them down, but they are all over the place, in the
cafs and clubs.  They have done what they were meant to do."

Clay took another cigar from his pocket and rolled it between his lips.
"What does it say?" he asked.

"It goes over the old ground first.  It says Alvarez has given the
richest birthright of his country to aliens--that means the mines and
Langham--and has put an alien in command of the army--that is meant for
me.  I've no more to do with the army than you have--I only wish I had!
And then it says that the boundary aggressions of Ecuador and Venezuela
have not been resented in consequence.  It asks what can be expected of
a President who is as blind to the dishonor of his country as he is to
the dishonor of his own home?"

Clay muttered under his breath, "Well, go on.  Is it explicit? More
explicit than that?"

"Yes," said Stuart, grimly.  "I can't repeat it.  It is quite clear
what they mean."

"Have you got any of them?" Clay asked.  "Can you fix it on some one
that you can fight?"

"Mendoza did it, of course," Stuart answered, "but we cannot prove it.
And if we could, we are not strong enough to take him. He has the city
full of his men now, and the troops are pouring in every hour."

"Well, Alvarez can stop that, can't he?"

"They are coming in for the annual review.  He can't show the people
that he is afraid of his own army."

"What are you going to do?"

"What am I going to do?" Stuart repeated, dully.  "That is what I want
you to tell me.  There is nothing I can do now.  I've brought trouble
and insult on people who have been kinder to me than my own blood have
been.  Who took me in when I was naked and clothed me, when I hadn't a
friend or a sixpence to my name.  You remember--I came here from that
row in Colombia with my wound, and I was down with the fever when they
found me, and Alvarez gave me the appointment.  And this is how I
reward them.  If I stay I do more harm.  If I go away I leave them
surrounded by enemies, and not enemies who fight fair, but damned
thieves and scoundrels, who stab at women and who fight in the dark.  I
wouldn't have had it happen, old man, for my right arm! They--they have
been so kind to me, and I have been so happy here--and now!"  The boy
bowed his face in his hands and sat breathing brokenly while Clay
turned his unlit cigar between his teeth and peered at him curiously
through the darkness.  "Now I have made them both unhappy, and they
hate me, and I hate myself, and I have brought nothing but trouble to
every one.  First I made my own people miserable, and now I make my
best friends miserable, and I had better be dead.  I wish I were dead.
I wish I had never been born."

Clay laid his hand on the other's bowed shoulder and shook him gently.
"Don't talk like that," he said; "it does no good. Why do you hate
yourself?"

"What?" asked Stuart, wearily, without looking up.  "What did you say?"

"You said you had made them hate you, and you added that you hated
yourself.  Well, I can see why they naturally would be angry for the
time, at least.  But why do you hate yourself? Have you reason to?"

"I don't understand," said Stuart.

"Well, I can't make it any plainer," Clay replied.  "It isn't a
question I will ask.  But you say you want my advice.  Well, my advice
to my friend and to a man who is not my friend, differ. And in this
case it depends on whether what that thing--" Clay kicked the paper
which had fallen on the ground--"what that thing says is true."

The younger man looked at the paper below him and then back at Clay,
and sprang to his feet.

"Why, damn you," he cried, "what do you mean?"

He stood above Clay with both arms rigid at his side and his head bent
forward.  The dawn had just broken, and the two men saw each other in
the ghastly gray light of the morning.  "If any man," cried Stuart
thickly, "dares to say that that blackguardly lie is true I'll kill
him.  You or any one else.  Is that what you mean, damn you?  If it is,
say so, and I'll break every bone of your body."

"Well, that's much better," growled Clay, sullenly.  "The way you went
on wishing you were dead and hating yourself made me almost lose faith
in mankind.  Now you go make that speech to the President, and then
find the man who put up those placards, and if you can't find the right
man, take any man you meet and make him eat it, paste and all, and beat
him to death if he doesn't. Why, this is no time to whimper--because
the world is full of liars.  Go out and fight them and show them you
are not afraid. Confound you, you had me so scared there that I almost
thrashed you myself.  Forgive me, won't you?" he begged earnestly. He
rose and held out his hand and the other took it, doubtfully. "It was
your own fault, you young idiot," protested Clay. "You told your story
the wrong way.  Now go home and get some sleep and I'll be back in a
few hours to help you.  Look!" he said.  He pointed through the trees
to the sun that shot up like a red hot disk of heat above the cool
green of the mountains. "See," said Clay, "God has given us another
day.  Seven battles were fought in seven days once in my country.
Let's be thankful, old man, that we're NOT dead, but alive to fight our
own and other people's battles."

The younger man sighed and pressed Clay's hand again before he dropped
it.

"You are very good to me," he said.  "I'm not just quite myself this
morning.  I'm a bit nervous, I think.  You'll surely come, won't you?"

"By noon," Clay promised.  "And if it does come," he added, "don't
forget my fifteen hundred men at the mines."

"Good! I won't," Stuart replied.  "I'll call on you if I need them."
He raised his fingers mechanically to his helmet in salute, and
catching up his sword turned and strode away erect and soldierly
through the debris and weeds of the deserted plaza.

Clay remained motionless on the steps of the pedestal and followed the
younger man with his eyes.  He drew a long breath and began a leisurely
search through his pockets for his match-box, gazing about him as he
did so, as though looking for some one to whom he could speak his
feelings.  He lifted his eyes to the stern, smooth-shaven face of the
bronze statue above him that seemed to be watching Stuart's departing
figure.

"General Bolivar," Clay said, as he lit his cigar, "observe that young
man.  He is a soldier and a gallant gentleman.  You, sir, were a great
soldier--the greatest this God-forsaken country will ever know--and you
were, sir, an ardent lover.  I ask you to salute that young man as I
do, and to wish him well."  Clay lifted his high hat to the back of the
young officer as it was hidden in the hanging vines, and once again,
with grave respect to the grim features of the great general above him,
and then smiling at his own conceit, he ran lightly down the steps and
disappeared among the trees of the plaza.



IX

Clay slept for three hours.  He had left a note on the floor
instructing MacWilliams and young Langham not to go to the mines, but
to waken him at ten o'clock, and by eleven the three men were galloping
off to the city.  As they left the Palms they met Hope returning from a
morning ride on the Alameda, and Clay begged her, with much concern,
not to ride abroad again.  There was a difference in his tone toward
her.  There was more anxiety in it than the occasion seemed to justify,
and he put his request in the form of a favor to himself, while the day
previous he would simply have told her that she must not go riding
alone.

"Why?" asked Hope, eagerly.  "Is there going to be trouble?"

"I hope not," Clay said, "but the soldiers are coming in from the
provinces for the review, and the roads are not safe."

"I'd be safe with you, though," said Hope, smiling persuasively upon
the three men.  "Won't you take me with you, please?"

"Hope," said young Langham in the tone of the elder brother's brief
authority, "you must go home at once."

Hope smiled wickedly.  "I don't want to," she said.

"I'll bet you a box of cigars I can beat you to the veranda by fifty
yards," said MacWilliams, turning his horse's head.

Hope clasped her sailor hat in one hand and swung her whip with the
other.  "I think not," she cried, and disappeared with a flutter of
skirts and a scurry of flying pebbles.

"At times," said Clay, "MacWilliams shows an unexpected knowledge of
human nature."

"Yes, he did quite right," assented Langham, nodding his head
mysteriously.  "We've no time for girls at present, have we?"

"No, indeed," said Clay, hiding any sign of a smile.

Langham breathed deeply at the thought of the part he was to play in
this coming struggle, and remained respectfully silent as they trotted
toward the city.  He did not wish to disturb the plots and counterplots
that he was confident were forming in Clay's brain, and his devotion
would have been severely tried had he known that his hero's mind was
filled with a picture of a young girl in a blue shirt-waist and a
whipcord riding-skirt.

Clay sent for Stuart to join them at the restaurant, and MacWilliams
arriving at the same time, the four men seated themselves conspicuously
in the centre of the caf and sipped their chocolate as though
unconscious of any imminent danger, and in apparent freedom from all
responsibilities and care.  While MacWilliams and Langham laughed and
disputed over a game of dominoes, the older men exchanged, under cover
of their chatter, the few words which they had met to speak.

The manifestoes, Stuart said, had failed of their purpose.  He had
already called upon the President, and had offered to resign his
position and leave the country, or to stay and fight his maligners, and
take up arms at once against Mendoza's party. Alvarez had treated him
like a son, and bade him be patient.  He held that Caesar's wife was
above suspicion because she was Caesar's wife, and that no canards
posted at midnight could affect his faith in his wife or in his friend.
He refused to believe that any coup d'etat was imminent, save the one
which he himself meditated when he was ready to proclaim the country in
a state of revolution, and to assume a military dictatorship.

"What nonsense!" exclaimed Clay.  "What is a military dictatorship
without soldiers?  Can't he see that the army is with Mendoza?"

"No," Stuart replied.  "Rojas and I were with him all the morning.
Rojas is an old trump, Clay.  He's not bright and he's old-fashioned;
but he is honest.  And the people know it.  If I had Rojas for a chief
instead of Alvarez, I'd arrest Mendoza with my own hand, and I wouldn't
be afraid to take him to the carcel through the streets.  The people
wouldn't help him.  But the President doesn't dare.  Not that he hasn't
pluck," added the young lieutenant, loyally, "for he takes his life in
his hands when he goes to the review tomorrow, and he knows it.  Think
of it, will you, out there alone with a field of five thousand men
around him!  Rojas thinks he can hold half of them, as many as Mendoza
can, and I have my fifty.  But you can't tell what any one of them will
do for a drink or a dollar.  They're no more soldiers than these
waiters.  They're bandits in uniform, and they'll kill for the man that
pays best."

"Then why doesn't Alvarez pay them?" Clay growled.

Stuart looked away and lowered his eyes to the table.  "He hasn't the
money, I suppose," he said, evasively.  "He--he has transferred every
cent of it into drafts on Rothschild.  They are at the house now,
representing five millions of dollars in gold--and her jewels,
too--packed ready for flight."

"Then he does expect trouble?" said Clay.  "You told me--"

"They're all alike; you know them," said Stuart.  "They won't believe
they're in danger until the explosion comes, but they always have a
special train ready, and they keep the funds of the government under
their pillows.  He engaged apartments on the Avenue Kleber six months
ago."

"Bah!" said Clay.  "It's the old story.  Why don't you quit him?"

Stuart raised his eyes and dropped them again, and Clay sighed. "I'm
sorry," he said.

MacWilliams interrupted them in an indignant stage-whisper. "Say, how
long have we got to keep up this fake game?" he asked.  "I don't know
anything about dominoes, and neither does Ted.  Tell us what you've
been saying.  Is there going to be trouble?  If there is, Ted and I
want to be in it.  We are looking for trouble."

Clay had tipped back his chair, and was surveying the restaurant and
the blazing plaza beyond its open front with an expression of cheerful
unconcern.  Two men were reading the morning papers near the door, and
two others were dragging through a game of dominoes in a far corner.
The heat of midday had settled on the place, and the waiters dozed,
with their chairs tipped back against the walls.  Outside, the awning
of the restaurant threw a broad shadow across the marble-topped tables
on the sidewalk, and half a dozen fiacre drivers slept peacefully in
their carriages before the door.

The town was taking its siesta, and the brisk step of a stranger who
crossed the tessellated floor and rapped with his knuckles on the top
of the cigar-case was the only sign of life.  The newcomer turned with
one hand on the glass case and swept the room carelessly with his eyes.
They were hard blue eyes under straight eyebrows.  Their owner was
dressed unobtrusively in a suit of rough tweed, and this and his black
hat, and the fact that he was smooth-shaven, distinguished him as a
foreigner.

As he faced them the forelegs of Clay's chair descended slowly to the
floor, and he began to smile comprehendingly and to nod his head as
though the coming of the stranger had explained something of which he
had been in doubt.  His companions turned and followed the direction of
his eyes, but saw nothing of interest in the newcomer.  He looked as
though he might be a concession hunter from the States, or a Manchester
drummer, prepared to offer six months' credit on blankets and hardware.

Clay rose and strode across the room, circling the tables in such a way
that he could keep himself between the stranger and the door.  At his
approach the new-comer turned his back and fumbled with his change on
the counter.

"Captain Burke, I believe?" said Clay.  The stranger bit the cigar he
had just purchased, and shook his head.  "I am very glad to see you,"
Clay continued.  "Sit down, won't you?  I want to talk with you."

"I think you've made a mistake," the stranger answered, quietly.  "My
name is--"

"Colonel, perhaps, then," said Clay.  "I might have known it. I
congratulate you, Colonel."

The man looked at Clay for an instant, with the cigar clenched between
his teeth and his blue eyes fixed steadily on the other's face.  Clay
waved his hand again invitingly toward a table, and the man shrugged
his shoulders and laughed, and, pulling a chair toward him, sat down.

"Come over here, boys," Clay called.  "I want you to meet an old friend
of mine, Captain Burke."

The man called Burke stared at the three men as they crossed the room
and seated themselves at the table, and nodded to them in silence.

"We have here," said Clay, gayly, but in a low voice, "the key to the
situation.  This is the gentleman who supplies Mendoza with the sinews
of war.  Captain Burke is a brave soldier and a citizen of my own or of
any country, indeed, which happens to have the most sympathetic
Consul-General."

Burke smiled grimly, with a condescending nod, and putting away the
cigar, took out a brier pipe and began to fill it from his
tobacco-pouch.  "The Captain is a man of few words and extremely modest
about himself," Clay continued, lightly; "so I must tell you who he is
myself.  He is a promoter of revolutions.  That is his business,--a
professional promoter of revolutions, and that is what makes me so glad
to see him again.  He knows all about the present crisis here, and he
is going to tell us all he knows as soon as he fills his pipe.  I ought
to warn you, Burke," he added, "that this is Captain Stuart, in charge
of the police and the President's cavalry troop.  So, you see, whatever
you say, you will have one man who will listen to you."

Burke crossed one short fat leg over the other, and crowded the tobacco
in the bowl of his pipe with his thumb.

"I thought you were in Chili, Clay," he said.

"No, you didn't think I was in Chili," Clay replied, kindly. "I left
Chili two years ago.  The Captain and I met there," he explained to the
others, "when Balmaceda was trying to make himself dictator.  The
Captain was on the side of the Congressionalists, and was furnishing
arms and dynamite. The Captain is always on the winning side, at least
he always has been--up to the present.  He is not a creature of
sentiment; are you, Burke?  The Captain believes with Napoleon that God
is on the side that has the heaviest artillery."

Burke lighted his pipe and drummed absentmindedly on the table with his
match-box.

"I can't afford to be sentimental," he said.  "Not in my business."

"Of course not," Clay assented, cheerfully.  He looked at Burke and
laughed, as though the sight of him recalled pleasant memories.  "I
wish I could give these boys an idea of how clever you are, Captain,"
he said.  "The Captain was the first man, for instance, to think of
packing cartridges in tubs of lard, and of sending rifles in
piano-cases.  He represents the Welby revolver people in England, and
half a dozen firms in the States, and he has his little stores in Tampa
and Mobile and Jamaica, ready to ship off at a moment's notice to any
revolution in Central America.  When I first met the Captain," Clay
continued, gleefully, and quite unmindful of the other's continued
silence, "he was starting off to rescue Arabi Pasha from the island of
Ceylon.  You may remember, boys, that when Dufferin saved Arabi from
hanging, the British shipped him to Ceylon as a political prisoner.
Well, the Captain was sent by Arabi's followers in Egypt to bring him
back to lead a second rebellion. Burke had everybody bribed at Ceylon,
and a fine schooner fitted out and a lot of ruffians to do the
fighting, and then the good, kind British Government pardoned Arabi the
day before Burke arrived in port.  And you never got a cent for it; did
you, Burke?"

Burke shook his head and frowned.

"Six thousand pounds sterling I was to have got for that," he said,
with a touch of pardonable pride in his voice, "and they set him free
the day before I got there, just as Mr. Clay tells you."

"And then you headed Granville Prior's expedition for buried treasure
off the island of Cocos, didn't you?" said Clay.  "Go on, tell them
about it.  Be sociable.  You ought to write a book about your different
business ventures, Burke, indeed you ought; but then," Clay added,
smiling, "nobody would believe you." Burke rubbed his chin,
thoughtfully, with his fingers, and looked modestly at the ceiling, and
the two younger boys gazed at him with open-mouthed interest.

"There ain't anything in buried treasure," he said, after a pause,
"except the money that's sunk in the fitting out.  It sounds good, but
it's all foolishness."

"All foolishness, eh?" said Clay, encouragingly.  "And what did you do
after Balmaceda was beaten?--after I last saw you?"

"Crespo," Burke replied, after a pause, during which he pulled gently
on his pipe.  "'Caroline Brewer'--cleared from Key West for Curacao,
with cargo of sewing-machines and ploughs--beached below
Maracaibo--thirty-five thousand rounds and two thousand rifles--at
twenty bolivars apiece."

"Of course," said Clay, in a tone of genuine appreciation.  "I might
have known you'd be in that.  He says," he explained, "that he assisted
General Crespo in Venezuela during his revolution against Guzman
Blanco's party, and loaded a tramp steamer called the 'Caroline Brewer'
at Key West with arms, which he landed safely at a place for which he
had no clearance papers, and he received forty thousand dollars in our
money for the job--and very good pay, too, I should think," commented
Clay.

"Well, I don't know," Burke demurred.  "You take in the cost of leasing
the boat and provisioning her, and the crew's wages, and the cost of
the cargo; that cuts into profits.  Then I had to stand off shore
between Trinidad and Curacao for over three weeks before I got the
signal to run in, and after that I was chased by a gun-boat for three
days, and the crazy fool put a shot clean through my engine-room.  Cost
me about twelve hundred dollars in repairs."

There was a pause, and Clay turned his eyes to the street, and then
asked, abruptly, "What are you doing now?"

"Trying to get orders for smokeless powder," Burke answered, promptly.
He met Clay's look with eyes as undisturbed as his own.  "But they
won't touch it down here," he went on.  "It doesn't appeal to 'em.
It's too expensive, and they'd rather see the smoke.  It makes them
think--"

"How long did you expect to stay here?" Clay interrupted.

"How long?" repeated Burke, like a man in a witness-box who is trying
to gain time.  "Well, I was thinking of leaving by Friday, and taking a
mule-train over to Bogota instead of waiting for the steamer to Colon."
He blew a mouthful of smoke into the air and watched it drifting toward
the door with apparent interest.

"The 'Santiago' leaves here Saturday for New York.  I guess you had
better wait over for her," Clay said.  "I'll engage your passage, and,
in the meantime, Captain Stuart here will see that they treat you well
in the cuartel."

The men around the table started, and sat motionless looking at Clay,
but Burke only took his pipe from his mouth and knocked the ashes out
on the heel of his boot.  "What am I going to the cuartel for?" he
asked.

"Well, the public good, I suppose," laughed Clay.  "I'm sorry, but it's
your own fault.  You shouldn't have shown yourself here at all."

"What have you got to do with it?" asked Burke, calmly, as he began to
refill his pipe.  He had the air of a man who saw nothing before him
but an afternoon of pleasant discourse and leisurely inactivity.

"You know what I've got to do with it," Clay replied.  "I've got our
concession to look after."

"Well, you're not running the town, too, are you?" asked Burke.

"No, but I'm going to run you out of it," Clay answered. "Now, what are
you going to do,--make it unpleasant for us and force our hand, or
drive down quietly with our friend MacWilliams here?  He is the best
one to take you, because he's not so well known."

Burke turned his head and looked over his shoulder at Stuart.

"You taking orders from Mr. Clay, to-day, Captain Stuart?" he asked.

"Yes," Stuart answered, smiling.  "I agree with Mr. Clay in whatever he
thinks right."

"Oh, well, in that case," said Burke, rising reluctantly, with a
protesting sigh, "I guess I'd better call on the American minister."

"You can't.  He's in Ecuador on his annual visit," said Clay.

"Indeed!  That's bad for me," muttered Burke, as though in much
concern.  "Well, then, I'll ask you to let me see our consul here."

"Certainly," Clay assented, with alacrity.  "Mr. Langham, this young
gentleman's father, got him his appointment, so I've no doubt he'll be
only too glad to do anything for a friend of ours."

Burke raised his eyes and looked inquiringly at Clay, as though to
assure himself that this was true, and Clay smiled back at him.

"Oh, very well," Burke said.  "Then, as I happen to be an Irishman by
the name of Burke, and a British subject, I'll try Her Majesty's
representative, and we'll see if he will allow me to be locked up
without a reason or a warrant."

"That's no good, either," said Clay, shaking his head.  "You fixed your
nationality, as far as this continent is concerned, in Rio harbor, when
Peixoto handed you over to the British admiral, and you claimed to be
an American citizen, and were sent on board the 'Detroit.'  If there's
any doubt about that we've only got to cable to Rio Janeiro--to either
legation.  But what's the use? They know me here, and they don't know
you, and I do. You'll have to go to jail and stay there."

"Oh, well, if you put it that way, I'll go," said Burke. "But," he
added, in a lower voice, "it's too late, Clay."

The expression of amusement on Clay's face, and his ease of manner,
fell from him at the words, and he pulled Burke back into the chair
again.  "What do you mean?" he asked, anxiously.

"I mean just that, it's too late," Burke answered.  "I don't mind going
to jail.  I won't be there long.  My work's all done and paid for.  I
was only staying on to see the fun at the finish, to see you fellows
made fools of."

"Oh, you're sure of that, are you?" asked Clay.

"My dear boy!" exclaimed the American, with a suggestion in his speech
of his Irish origin, as his interest rose.  "Did you ever know me to go
into anything of this sort for the sentiment of it? Did you ever know
me to back the losing side?  No.  Well, I tell you that you fellows
have no more show in this than a parcel of Sunday-school children.  Of
course I can't say when they mean to strike.  I don't know, and I
wouldn't tell you if I did.  But when they do strike there'll be no
striking back.  It'll be all over but the cheering."

Burke's tone was calm and positive.  He held the centre of the stage
now, and he looked from one to the other of the serious faces around
him with an expression of pitying amusement.

"Alvarez may get off, and so may Madame Alvarez," he added, lowering
his voice and turning his face away from Stuart.  "But not if she shows
herself in the streets, and not if she tries to take those drafts and
jewels with her."

"Oh, you know that, do you?" interrupted Clay.

"I know nothing," Burke replied.  "At least, nothing to what the rest
of them know.  That's only the gossip I pick up at headquarters.  It
doesn't concern me.  I've delivered my goods and given my receipt for
the money, and that's all I care about. But if it will make an old
friend feel any more comfortable to have me in jail, why, I'll go,
that's all."

Clay sat with pursed lips looking at Stuart.  The two boys leaned with
their elbows on the tables and stared at Burke, who was searching
leisurely through his pockets for his match-box.  From outside came the
lazy cry of a vendor of lottery tickets, and the swift, uneven patter
of bare feet, as company after company of dust-covered soldiers passed
on their way from the provinces, with their shoes swinging from their
bayonets.

Clay slapped the table with an exclamation of impatience.

"After all, this is only a matter of business," he said, "with all of
us.  What do you say, Burke, to taking a ride with me to Stuart's
rooms, and having a talk there with the President and Mr. Langham?
Langham has three millions sunk in these mines, and Alvarez has even
better reasons than that for wanting to hold his job.  What do you say?
That's better than going to jail. Tell us what they mean to do, and who
is to do it, and I'll let you name your own figure, and I'll guarantee
you that they'll meet it.  As long as you've no sentiment, you might as
well fight on the side that will pay best."

Burke opened his lips as though to speak, and then shut them again,
closely.  If the others thought that he was giving Clay's proposition a
second and more serious thought, he was quick to undeceive them.

"There ARE men in the business who do that sort of thing," he said.
"They sell arms to one man, and sell the fact that he's got them to the
deputy-marshals, and sell the story of how smart they've been to the
newspapers.  And they never make any more sales after that.  I'd look
pretty, wouldn't I, bringing stuff into this country, and getting paid
for it, and then telling you where it was hid, and everything else I
knew?  I've no sentiment, as you say, but I've got business instinct,
and that's not business.  No, I've told you enough, and if you think
I'm not safe at large, why I'm quite ready to take a ride with your
young friend here."

MacWilliams rose with alacrity, and beaming with pleasure at the
importance of the duty thrust upon him.

Burke smiled.  "The young 'un seems to like the job," he said.

"It's an honor to be associated with Captain Burke in any way," said
MacWilliams, as he followed him into a cab, while Stuart galloped off
before them in the direction of the cuartel.

"You wouldn't think so if you knew better," said Burke.  "My friends
have been watching us while we have been talking in there for the last
hour.  They're watching us now, and if I were to nod my head during
this ride, they'd throw you out into the street and set me free, if
they had to break the cab into kindling-wood while they were doing it."

MacWilliams changed his seat to the one opposite his prisoner, and
peered up and down the street in some anxiety.

"I suppose you know there's an answer to that, don't you?" he asked.
"Well, the answer is, that if you nod your head once, you lose the top
of it."

Burke gave an exclamation of disgust, and gazed at his zealous guardian
with an expression of trepidation and unconcealed disapproval.  "You're
not armed, are you?" he asked.

MacWilliams nodded.  "Why not?" he said; "these are rather heavy
weather times, just at present, thanks to you and your friends.  Why,
you seem rather afraid of fire-arms," he added, with the intolerance of
youth.

The Irish-American touched the young man on the knee, and lifted his
hat.  "My son," he said, "when your hair is as gray as that, and you
have been through six campaigns, you'll be brave enough to own that
you're afraid of fire-arms, too."



X

Clay and Langham left MacWilliams and Stuart to look after their
prisoner, and returned to the Palms, where they dined in state, and
made no reference, while the women were present, to the events of the
day.

The moon rose late that night, and as Hope watched it, from where she
sat at the dinner-table facing the open windows, she saw the figure of
a man standing outlined in silhouette upon the edge of the cliff.  He
was dressed in the uniform of a sailor, and the moonlight played along
the barrel of a rifle upon which he leaned, motionless and menacing,
like a sentry on a rampart.

Hope opened her lips to speak, and then closed them again, and smiled
with pleasurable excitement.  A moment later King, who sat on her
right, called one of the servants to his side and whispered some
instructions, pointing meanwhile at the wine upon the table.  And a
minute after, Hope saw the white figure of the servant cross the garden
and approach the sentinel.  She saw the sentry fling his gun sharply to
his hip, and then, after a moment's parley, toss it up to his shoulder
and disappear from sight among the plants of the garden.

The men did not leave the table with the ladies, as was their custom,
but remained in the dining-room, and drew their chairs closer together.

Mr. Langham would not believe that the downfall of the Government was
as imminent as the others believed it to be.  It was only after much
argument, and with great reluctance, that he had even allowed King to
arm half of his crew, and to place them on guard around the Palms.
Clay warned him that in the disorder that followed every successful
revolution, the homes of unpopular members of the Cabinet were often
burned, and that he feared, should Mendoza succeed, and Alvarez fall,
that the mob might possibly vent its victorious wrath on the Palms
because it was the home of the alien, who had, as they thought, robbed
the country of the iron mines.  Mr. Langham said he did not think the
people would tramp five miles into the country seeking vengeance.

There was an American man-of-war lying in the harbor of Truxillo, a
seaport of the republic that bounded Olancho on the south, and Clay was
in favor of sending to her captain by Weimer, the Consul, and asking
him to anchor off Valencia, to protect American interests.  The run
would take but a few hours, and the sight of the vessel's white hull in
the harbor would, he thought, have a salutary effect upon the
revolutionists.  But Mr. Langham said, firmly, that he would not ask
for help until he needed it.

"Well, I'm sorry," said Clay.  "I should very much like to have that
man-of-war here.  However, if you say no, we will try to get along
without her.  But, for the present, I think you had better imagine
yourself back in New York, and let us have an entirely free hand.
We've gone too far to drop out," he went on, laughing at the sight of
Mr. Langham's gloomy countenance. "We've got to fight them now.  It's
against human nature not to do it."

Mr. Langham looked appealingly at his son and at King.

They both smiled back at him in unanimous disapproval of his policy of
non-interference.

"Oh, very well," he said, at last.  "You gentlemen can go ahead, kill,
burn, and destroy if you wish.  But, considering the fact that it is my
property you are all fighting about, I really think I might have
something to say in the matter."  Mr. Langham gazed about him
helplessly, and shook his head.

"My doctor sends me down here from a quiet, happy home," he protested,
with humorous pathos, "that I may rest and get away from excitement,
and here I am with armed men patrolling my garden-paths, with a lot of
filibusters plotting at my own dinner-table, and a civil war likely to
break out, entirely on my account.  And Dr. Winter told me this was the
only place that would cure my nervous prostration!"

Hope joined Clay as soon as the men left the dining-room, and beckoned
him to the farther end of the veranda.  "Well, what is it?" she said.

"What is what?" laughed Clay.  He seated himself on the rail of the
veranda, with his face to the avenue and the driveway leading to the
house.  They could hear the others from the back of the house, and the
voice of young Langham, who was giving an imitation of MacWilliams, and
singing with peculiar emphasis, "There is no place like Home, Sweet
Home."

"Why are the men guarding the Palms, and why did you go to the Plaza
Bolivar this morning at daybreak?  Alice says you left them there.  I
want to know what it means.  I am nearly as old as Ted, and he knows.
The men wouldn't tell me."

"What men?"

"King's men from the 'Vesta'.  I saw some of them dodging around in the
bushes, and I went to find out what they were doing, and I walked into
fifteen of them at your office.  They have hammocks swung all over the
veranda, and a quick-firing gun made fast to the steps, and muskets
stacked all about, just like real soldiers, but they wouldn't tell me
why."

"We'll put you in the carcel," said Clay, "if you go spying on our
forces.  Your father doesn't wish you to know anything about it, but,
since you have found it out for yourself, you might as well know what
little there is to know.  It's the same story. Mendoza is getting ready
to start his revolution, or, rather, he has started it."

"Why don't you stop him?" asked Hope.

"You are very flattering," said Clay.  "Even if I could stop him, it's
not my business to do it as yet.  I have to wait until he interferes
with me, or my mines, or my workmen.  Alvarez is the man who should
stop him, but he is afraid.  We cannot do anything until he makes the
first move.  If I were the President, I'd have Mendoza shot to-morrow
morning and declare martial law. Then I'd arrest everybody I didn't
like, and levy forced loans on all the merchants, and sail away to
Paris and live happy ever after.  That's what Mendoza would do if he
caught any one plotting against him.  And that's what Alvarez should
do, too, according to his lights, if he had the courage of his
convictions, and of his education.  I like to see a man play his part
properly, don't you?  If you are an emperor, you ought to conduct
yourself like one, as our German friend does.  Or if you are a
prize-fighter, you ought to be a human bulldog. There's no such thing
as a gentlemanly pugilist, any more than there can be a virtuous
burglar.  And if you're a South American Dictator, you can't afford to
be squeamish about throwing your enemies into jail or shooting them for
treason.  The way to dictate is to dictate,--not to hide indoors all
day while your wife plots for you."

"Does she do that?" asked Hope.  "And do you think she will be in
danger--any personal danger, if the revolution comes?"

"Well, she is very unpopular," Clay answered, "and unjustly so, I
think.  But it would be better, perhaps, for her if she went as quietly
as possible, when she does go."

"Is our Captain Stuart in danger, too?" the girl continued, anxiously.
"Alice says they put up placards about him all over the city last
night.  She saw his men tearing them down as she was coming home.  What
has he done?"

"Nothing," Clay answered, shortly.  "He happens to be in a false
position, that's all.  They think he is here because he is not wanted
in his own country; that is not so.  That is not the reason he remains
here.  When he was even younger than he is now, he was wild and
foolish, and spent more money than he could afford, and lent more money
to his brother-officers, I have no doubt, than they ever paid back.  He
had to leave the regiment because his father wouldn't pay his debts,
and he has been selling his sword for the last three years to one or
another king or sultan or party all over the world, in China and
Madagascar, and later in Siam.  I hope you will be very kind to Stuart
and believe well of him, and that you will listen to no evil against
him.  Somewhere in England Stuart has a sister like you--about your
age, I mean, that loves him very dearly, and a father whose heart aches
for him, and there is a certain royal regiment that still drinks his
health with pride.  He is a lonely little chap, and he has no sense of
humor to help him out of his difficulties, but he is a very brave
gentleman.  And he is here fighting for men who are not worthy to hold
his horse's bridle, because of a woman.  And I tell you this because
you will hear many lies about him--and about her.  He serves her with
the same sort of chivalric devotion that his ancestors felt for the
woman whose ribbons they tied to their lances, and for whom they fought
in the lists."

"I understand," Hope said, softly.  "I am glad you told me.  I shall
not forget."  She sighed and shook her head.  "I wish they'd let you
manage it for them," she said.

Clay laughed.  "I fear my executive ability is not of so high an order;
besides, as I haven't been born to it, my conscience might trouble me
if I had to shoot my enemies and rob the worthy merchants.  I had
better stick to digging holes in the ground. That is all I seem to be
good for."

Hope looked up at him, quickly, in surprise.

"What do you mean by that?" she demanded.  There was a tone of such
sharp reproach in her voice that Clay felt himself put on the defensive.

"I mean nothing by it," he said.  "Your sister and I had a talk the
other day about a man's making the best of himself, and it opened my
eyes to--to many things.  It was a very healthy lesson."

"It could not have been a very healthy lesson," Hope replied, severely,
"if it makes you speak of your work slightingly, as you did then.  That
didn't sound at all natural, or like you.  It sounded like Alice.  Tell
me, did Alice say that?"

The pleasure of hearing Hope take his part against himself was so
comforting to Clay that he hesitated in answering in order to enjoy it
the longer.  Her enthusiasm touched him deeply, and he wondered if she
were enthusiastic because she was young, or because she was sure she
was right, and that he was in the wrong.

"It started this way," Clay began, carefully.  He was anxious to be
quite fair to Miss Langham, but he found it difficult to give her point
of view correctly, while he was hungering for a word that would
re-establish him in his own good opinion.  "Your sister said she did
not think very much of what I had done, but she explained kindly that
she hoped for better things from me. But what troubles me is, that I
will never do anything much better or very different in kind from the
work I have done lately, and so I am a bit discouraged about it in
consequence. You see," said Clay, "when I come to die, and they ask me
what I have done with my ten fingers, I suppose I will have to say,
'Well, I built such and such railroads, and I dug up so many tons of
ore, and opened new countries, and helped make other men rich.'  I
can't urge in my behalf that I happen to have been so fortunate as to
have gained the good-will of yourself or your sister.  That is quite
reason enough to me, perhaps, for having lived, but it might not appeal
to them.  I want to feel that I have accomplished something outside of
myself--something that will remain after I go.  Even if it is only a
breakwater or a patent coupling.  When I am dead it will not matter to
any one what I personally was, whether I was a bore or a most charming
companion, or whether I had red hair or blue.  It is the work that will
tell.  And when your sister, whose judgment is the judgment of the
outside world, more or less, says that the work is not worth while, I
naturally feel a bit discouraged.  It meant so much to me, and it hurt
me to find it meant so little to others."

Hope remained silent for some time, but the rigidity of her attitude,
and the tightness with which she pressed her lips together, showed that
her mind was deeply occupied.  They both sat silent for some few
moments, looking down toward the distant lights of the city.  At the
farther end of the double row of bushes that lined the avenue they
could see one of King's sentries passing to and fro across the roadway,
a long black shadow on the moonlit road.

"You are very unfair to yourself," the girl said at last, "and Alice
does not represent the opinion of the world, only of a very small part
of it--her own little world.  She does not know how little it is.  And
you are wrong as to what they will ask you at the end.  What will they
care whether you built railroads or painted impressionist pictures?
They will ask you 'What have you made of yourself?  Have you been fine,
and strong, and sincere?' That is what they will ask.  And we like you
because you are all of these things, and because you look at life so
cheerfully, and are unafraid.  We do not like men because they build
railroads, or because they are prime ministers.  We like them for what
they are themselves.  And as to your work!" Hope added, and then paused
in eloquent silence.  "I think it is a grand work, and a noble work,
full of hardships and self-sacrifices.  I do not know of any man who
has done more with his life than you have done with yours."  She
stopped and controlled her voice before she spoke again.  "You should
be very proud," she said.

Clay lowered his eyes and sat silent, looking down the roadway. The
thought that the girl felt what she said so deeply, and that the fact
that she had said it meant more to him than anything else in the world
could mean, left him thrilled and trembling. He wanted to reach out his
hand and seize both of hers, and tell her how much she was to him, but
it seemed like taking advantage of the truths of a confessional, or of
a child's innocent confidences.

"No, Miss Hope," he answered, with an effort to speak lightly, "I wish
I could believe you, but I know myself better than any one else can,
and I know that while my bridges may stand examination--_I_ can't."

Hope turned and looked at him with eyes full of such sweet meaning that
he was forced to turn his own away.

"I could trust both, I think," the girl said.

Clay drew a quick, deep breath, and started to his feet, as though he
had thrown off the restraint under which he had held himself.

It was not a girl, but a woman who had spoken then, but, though he
turned eagerly toward her, he stood with his head bowed, and did not
dare to read the verdict in her eyes.

The clatter of horses' hoofs coming toward them at a gallop broke in
rudely upon the tense stillness of the moment, but neither noticed it.
"How far," Clay began, in a strained voice, "how far," he asked, more
steadily, "could you trust me?"

Hope's eyes had closed for an instant, and opened again, and she smiled
upon him with a look of perfect confidence and content. The beat of the
horses' hoofs came now from the end of the driveway, and they could
hear the men at the rear of the house pushing back their chairs and
hurrying toward them.  Hope raised her head, and Clay moved toward her
eagerly.  The horses were within a hundred yards.  Before Hope could
speak, the sentry's voice rang out in a hoarse, sharp challenge, like
an alarm of fire on the silent night.  "Halt!" they heard him cry. And
as the horses tore past him, and their riders did not turn to look, he
shouted again, "Halt, damn you!" and fired.  The flash showed a splash
of red and yellow in the moonlight, and the report started into life
hundreds of echoes which carried it far out over the waters of the
harbor, and tossed it into sharp angles, and distant corners, and in an
instant a myriad of sounds answered it; the frightened cry of
night-birds, the barking of dogs in the village below, and the
footsteps of men running.

Clay glanced angrily down the avenue, and turned beseechingly to Hope.

"Go," she said.  "See what is wrong," and moved away as though she
already felt that he could act more freely when she was not near him.

The two horses fell back on their haunches before the steps, and
MacWilliams and Stuart tumbled out of their saddles, and started,
running back on foot in the direction from which the shot had come,
tugging at their revolvers.

"Come back," Clay shouted to them.  "That's all right.  He was only
obeying orders.  That's one of King's sentries."

"Oh, is that it?" said Stuart, in matter-of-fact tones, as he turned
again to the house.  "Good idea.  Tell him to fire lower next time.
And, I say," he went on, as he bowed curtly to the assembled company on
the veranda, "since you have got a picket out, you had better double
it.  And, Clay, see that no one leaves here without permission--no one.
That's more important, even, than keeping them out."

"King, will you--" Clay began.

"All right, General," laughed King, and walked away to meet his
sailors, who came running up the hill in great anxiety.

MacWilliams had not opened his lips, but he was bristling with
importance, and his effort to appear calm and soldierly, like Stuart,
told more plainly than speech that he was the bearer of some invaluable
secret.  The sight filled young Langham with a disquieting fear that he
had missed something.

Stuart looked about him, and pulled briskly at his gauntlets. King and
his sailors were grouped together on the grass before the house.  Mr.
Langham and his daughters, and Clay, were standing on the steps, and
the servants were peering around the corners of the house.

Stuart saluted Mr. Langham, as though to attract his especial
attention, and then addressed himself in a low tone to Clay.

"It's come," he said.  "We've been in it since dinner-time, and we've
got a whole night's work cut out for you."  He was laughing with
excitement, and paused for a moment to gain breath.  "I'll tell you the
worst of it first.  Mendoza has sent word to Alvarez that he wants the
men at the mines to be present at the review to-morrow.  He says they
must take part.  He wrote a most insolent letter.  Alvarez got out of
it by saying that the men were under contract to you, and that you must
give your permission first.  Mendoza sent me word that if you would not
let the men come, he would go out and fetch them in him self."

"Indeed!" growled Clay.  "Kirkland needs those men to-morrow to load
ore-cars for Thursday's steamer.  He can't spare them. That is our
answer, and it happens to be a true one, but if it weren't true, if
to-morrow was All Saints' Day, and the men had nothing to do but to lie
in the sun and sleep, Mendoza couldn't get them.  And if he comes to
take them to-morrow, he'll have to bring his army with him to do it.
And he couldn't do it then, Mr. Langham," Clay cried, turning to that
gentleman, "if I had better weapons.  The five thousand dollars I
wanted you to spend on rifles, sir, two months ago, might have saved
you several millions to-morrow."

Clay's words seemed to bear some special significance to Stuart and
MacWilliams, for they both laughed, and Stuart pushed Clay up the steps
before him.

"Come inside," he said.  "That is why we are here. MacWilliams has
found out where Burke hid his shipment of arms. We are going to try and
get them to-night."  He hurried into the dining-room, and the others
grouped themselves about the table. "Tell them about it, MacWilliams,"
Stuart commanded.  "I will see that no one overhears you."

MacWilliams was pushed into Mr. Langham's place at the head of the long
table, and the others dragged their chairs up close around him.  King
put the candles at the opposite end of the table, and set some
decanters and glasses in the centre.  "To look as though we were just
enjoying ourselves," he explained, pleasantly.

Mr. Langham, with his fine, delicate fingers beating nervously on the
table, observed the scene as an on-looker, rather than as the person
chiefly interested.  He smiled as he appreciated the incongruity of the
tableau, and the contrast which the actors presented to the situation.
He imagined how much it would amuse his contemporaries of the Union
Club, at home, if they could see him then, with the still, tropical
night outside, the candles reflected on the polished table and on the
angles of the decanters, and showing the intent faces of the young
girls and the men leaning eagerly forward around MacWilliams, who sat
conscious and embarrassed, his hair dishevelled, and his face covered
with dust, while Stuart paced up and down in the shadow, his sabre
clanking as he walked.

"Well, it happened like this," MacWilliams began, nervously, and
addressing himself to Clay.  "Stuart and I put Burke safely in a cell
by himself.  It was one of the old ones that face the street.  There
was a narrow window in it, about eight feet above the floor, and no
means of his reaching it, even if he stood on a chair.  We stationed
two troopers before the door, and sent out to a caf across the street
for our dinners.  I finished mine about nine o'clock, and said 'Good
night' to Stuart, and started to come out here. I went across the
street first, however, to give the restaurant man some orders about
Burke's breakfast.  It is a narrow street, you know, with a long
garden-wall and a row of little shops on one side, and with the
jail-wall taking up all of the other side.  The street was empty when I
left the jail, except for the sentry on guard in front of it, but just
as I was leaving the restaurant I saw one of Stuart's police come out
and peer up and down the street and over at the shops.  He looked
frightened and anxious, and as I wasn't taking chances on anything, I
stepped back into the restaurant and watched him through the window.
He waited until the sentry had turned his back, and started away from
him on his post, and then I saw him drop his sabre so that it rang on
the sidewalk.  He was standing, I noticed then, directly under the
third window from the door of the jail.  That was the window of Burke's
cell.  When I grasped that fact I got out my gun and walked to the door
of the restaurant.  Just as I reached it a piece of paper shot out
through the bars of Burke's cell and fell at the policeman's feet, and
he stamped his boot down on it and looked all around again to see if
any one had noticed him.  I thought that was my cue, and I ran across
the street with my gun pointed, and shouted to him to give me the
paper.  He jumped about a foot when he first saw me, but he was game,
for he grabbed up the paper and stuck it in his mouth and began to chew
on it.  I was right up on him then, and I hit him on the chin with my
left fist and knocked him down against the wall, and dropped on him
with both knees and choked him till I made him spit out the paper--and
two teeth," MacWilliams added, with a conscientious regard for details.
"The sentry turned just then and came at me with his bayonet, but I put
my finger to my lips, and that surprised him, so that he didn't know
just what to do, and hesitated.  You see, I didn't want Burke to hear
the row outside, so I grabbed my policeman by the collar and pointed to
the jail-door, and the sentry ran back and brought out Stuart and the
guard.  Stuart was pretty mad when he saw his policeman all bloody.  He
thought it would prejudice his other men against us, but I explained
out loud that the man had been insolent, and I asked Stuart to take us
both to his private room for a hearing, and, of course, when I told him
what had happened, he wanted to punch the chap, too.  We put him
ourselves into a cell where he could not communicate with any one, and
then we read the paper.  Stuart has it," said MacWilliams, pushing back
his chair, "and he'll tell you the rest."  There was a pause, in which
every one seemed to take time to breathe, and then a chorus of
questions and explanations.

King lifted his glass to MacWilliams, and nodded.

"'Well done, Condor,'" he quoted, smiling.

"Yes," said Clay, tapping the younger man on the shoulder as he passed
him.  "That's good work.  Now show us the paper, Stuart."

Stuart pulled the candles toward him, and spread a slip of paper on the
table.

"Burke did this up in one of those paper boxes for wax matches," he
explained, "and weighted it with a twenty-dollar gold piece.
MacWilliams kept the gold piece, I believe."

"Going to use it for a scarf-pin," explained MacWilliams, in
parenthesis.  "Sort of war-medal, like the Chief's," he added, smiling.

"This is in Spanish," Stuart explained.  "I will translate it. It is
not addressed to any one, and it is not signed, but it was evidently
written to Mendoza, and we know it is in Burke's handwriting, for we
compared it with some notes of his that we took from him before he was
locked up.  He says, 'I cannot keep the appointment, as I have been
arrested.'  The line that follows here," Stuart explained, raising his
head, "has been scratched out, but we spent some time over it, and we
made out that it read:  'It was Mr. Clay who recognized me, and ordered
my arrest. He is the best man the others have.  Watch him.'  We think
he rubbed that out through good feeling toward Clay.  There seems to be
no other reason.  He's a very good sort, this old Burke, I think."

"Well, never mind him; it was very decent of him, anyway," said Clay.
"Go on.  Get to Hecuba."

"'I cannot keep the appointment, as I have been arrested,'" repeated
Stuart.  "'I landed the goods last night in safety.  I could not come
in when first signalled, as the wind and tide were both off shore.  But
we got all the stuff stored away by morning.  Your agent paid me in
full and got my receipt. Please consider this as the same thing--as the
equivalent'--it is difficult to translate it exactly," commented
Stuart--"'as the equivalent of the receipt I was to have given when I
made my report to-night.  I sent three of your guards away on my own
responsibility, for I think more than that number might attract
attention to the spot, and they might be seen from the ore-trains.'
That is the point of the note for us, of course," Stuart interrupted
himself to say.  "Burke adds," he went on, "'that they are to make no
effort to rescue him, as he is quite comfortable, and is willing to
remain in the carcel until they are established in power.'"

"Within sight of the ore-trains!" exclaimed Clay.  "There are no
ore-trains but ours.  It must be along the line of the road."

"MacWilliams says he knows every foot of land along the railroad," said
Stuart, "and he is sure the place Burke means is the old fortress on
the Platta inlet, because--"

"It is the only place," interrupted MacWilliams, "where there is no
surf.  They could run small boats up the inlet and unload in smooth
water within twenty feet of the ramparts; and another thing, that is
the only point on the line with a wagon road running direct from it to
the Capital.  It's an old road, and hasn't been travelled over for
years, but it could be used. No," he added, as though answering the
doubt in Clay's mind, "there is no other place.  If I had a map here I
could show you in a minute; where the beach is level there is a jungle
between it and the road, and wherever there is open country, there is a
limestone formation and rocks between it and the sea, where no boat
could touch."

"But the fortress is so conspicuous," Clay demurred; "the nearest
rampart is within twenty feet of the road.  Don't you remember we
measured it when we thought of laying the double track?"

"That is just what Burke says," urged Stuart.  "That is the reason he
gives for leaving only three men on guard--'I think more than that
number might attract attention to the spot, as they might be seen from
the ore-trains.'"

"Have you told any one of this?" Clay asked.  "What have you done so
far?"

"We've done nothing," said Stuart.  "We lost our nerve when we found
out how much we knew, and we decided we'd better leave it to you."

"Whatever we do must be done at once," said Clay.  "They will come for
the arms to-night, most likely, and we must be there first.  I agree
with you entirely about the place.  It is only a question now of our
being on time.  There are two things to do.  The first thing is, to
keep them from getting the arms, and the second is, if we are lucky, to
secure them for ourselves. If we can pull it off properly, we ought to
have those rifles in the mines before midnight.  If we are hurried or
surprised, we must dump them off the fort into the sea."  Clay laughed
and looked about him at the men.  "We are only following out General
Bolivar's saying 'When you want arms take them from the enemy.' Now,
there are three places we must cover.  This house, first of all," he
went on, inclining his head quickly toward the two sisters, "then the
city, and the mines.  Stuart's place, of course, is at the Palace.
King must take care of this house and those in it, and MacWilliams and
Langham and I must look after the arms.  We must organize two parties,
and they had better approach the fort from here and from the mines at
the same time. I will need you to do some telegraphing for me, Mac;
and, King, I must ask you for some more men from the yacht.  How many
have you?"

King answered that there were fifteen men still on board, ten of whom
would be of service.  He added that they were all well equipped for
fighting.

"I believe King's a pirate in business hours," Clay said, smiling.
"All right, that's good.  Now go tell ten of them to meet me at the
round-house in half an hour.  I will get MacWilliams to telegraph
Kirkland to run an engine and flat cars to within a half mile of the
fort on the north, and we will come up on it with the sailors and Ted,
here, from the south.  You must run the engine yourself, MacWilliams,
and perhaps it would be better, King, if your men joined us at the foot
of the grounds here and not at the round-house.  None of the workmen
must see our party start.  Do you agree with me?" he asked, turning to
those in the group about him.  "Has anybody any criticism to make?"

Stuart and King looked at one another ruefully and laughed.  "I don't
see what good I am doing in town," protested Stuart. "Yes, and I don't
see where I come in, either," growled King, in aggrieved tones.  "These
youngsters can't do it all; besides I ought to have charge of my own
men."

"Mutiny," said Clay, in some perplexity, "rank mutiny.  Why, it's only
a picnic.  There are but three men there.  We don't need sixteen white
men to frighten off three Olanchoans."

"I'll tell you what to do," cried Hope, with the air of having
discovered a plan which would be acceptable to every one, "let's all
go."

"Well, I certainly mean to go," said Mr. Langham, decidedly.  "So some
one else must stay here.  Ted, you will have to look after your
sisters."

The son and heir smiled upon his parent with a look of affectionate
wonder, and shook his head at him in fond and pitying disapproval.

"I'll stay," said King.  "I have never seen such ungallant conduct.
Ladies," he said, "I will protect your lives and property, and we'll
invent something exciting to do ourselves, even if we have to bombard
the Capital."

The men bade the women good-night, and left them with King and Mr.
Langham, who had been persuaded to remain overnight, while Stuart rode
off to acquaint Alvarez and General Rojas with what was going on.



XI

There was no chance for Clay to speak to Hope again, though he felt the
cruelty of having to leave her with everything between them in this
interrupted state.  But their friends stood about her, interested and
excited over this expedition of smuggled arms, unconscious of the great
miracle that had come into his life and of his need to speak to and to
touch the woman who had wrought it.  Clay felt how much more binding
than the laws of life are the little social conventions that must be
observed at times, even though the heart is leaping with joy or racked
with sorrow.  He stood within a few feet of the woman he loved, wanting
to cry out at her and to tell her all the wonderful things which he had
learned were true for the first time that night, but he was forced
instead to keep his eyes away from her face and to laugh and answer
questions, and at the last to go away content with having held her hand
for an instant, and to have heard her say "good-luck."

MacWilliams called Kirkland to the office at the other end of the
Company's wire, and explained the situation to him.  He was instructed
to run an engine and freight-cars to a point a quarter of a mile north
of the fort, and to wait there until he heard a locomotive whistle or
pistol shots, when he was to run on to the fort as quickly and as
noiselessly as possible.  He was also directed to bring with him as
many of the American workmen as he could trust to keep silent
concerning the events of the evening.  At ten o'clock MacWilliams had
the steam up in a locomotive, and with his only passenger-car in the
rear, ran it out of the yard and stopped the train at the point nearest
the cars where ten of the 'Vesta's' crew were waiting.  The sailors had
no idea as to where they were going, or what they were to do, but the
fact that they had all been given arms filled them with satisfaction,
and they huddled together at the bottom of the car smoking and
whispering, and radiant with excitement and satisfaction.

The train progressed cautiously until it was within a half mile below
the fort, when Clay stopped it, and, leaving two men on guard, stepped
off the remaining distance on the ties, his little band following
noiselessly behind him like a procession of ghosts in the moonlight.
They halted and listened from time to time as they drew near the ruins,
but there was no sound except the beating of the waves on the rocks and
the rustling of the sea-breeze through the vines and creepers about
them.

Clay motioned to the men to sit down, and, beckoning to MacWilliams,
directed him to go on ahead and reconnoitre.

"If you fire we will come up," he said.  "Get back here as soon as you
can."

"Aren't you going to make sure first that Kirkland is on the other side
of the fort?" MacWilliams whispered.

Clay replied that he was certain Kirkland had already arrived. "He had
a shorter run than ours, and he wired you he was ready to start when we
were, didn't he?" MacWilliams nodded.

"Well, then, he is there.  I can count on Kirk."

MacWilliams pulled at his heavy boots and hid them in the bushes, with
his helmet over them to mark the spot.  "I feel as though I was going
to rob a bank," he chuckled, as he waved his hand and crept off into
the underbrush.

For the first few moments the men who were left behind sat silent, but
as the minutes wore on, and MacWilliams made no sign, they grew
restless, and shifted their positions, and began to whisper together,
until Clay shook his head at them, and there was silence again until
one of them, in trying not to cough, almost strangled, and the others
tittered and those nearest pummelled him on the back.

Clay pulled out his revolver, and after spinning the cylinder under his
finger-nail, put it back in its holder again, and the men, taking this
as an encouraging promise of immediate action, began to examine their
weapons again for the twentieth time, and there was a chorus of short,
muffled clicks as triggers were drawn back and cautiously lowered and
levers shot into place and caught again.

One of the men farthest down the track raised his arm, and all turned
and half rose as they saw MacWilliams coming toward them on a run,
leaping noiselessly in his stocking feet from tie to tie.  He dropped
on his knees between Clay and Langham.

"The guns are there all right," he whispered, panting, "and there are
only three men guarding them.  They are all sitting on the beach
smoking.  I hustled around the fort and came across the whole outfit in
the second gallery.  It looks like a row of coffins, ten coffins and
about twenty little boxes and kegs.  I'm sure that means they are
coming for them to-night.  They've not tried to hide them nor to cover
them up.  All we've got to do is to walk down on the guards and tell
them to throw up their hands. It's too easy."

Clay jumped to his feet.  "Come on," he said.

"Wait till I get my boots on first," begged MacWilliams.  "I wouldn't
go over those cinders again in my bare feet for all the buried treasure
in the Spanish Main.  You can make all the noise you want; the waves
will drown it."

With MacWilliams to show them the way, the men scrambled up the outer
wall of the fort and crossed the moss-covered ramparts at the run.
Below them, on the sandy beach, were three men sitting around a
driftwood fire that had sunk to a few hot ashes.  Clay nodded to
MacWilliams.  "You and Ted can have them," he said. "Go with him,
Langham."

The sailors levelled their rifles at the three lonely figures on the
beach as the two boys slipped down the wall and fell on their hands and
feet in the sand below, and then crawled up to within a few feet of
where the men were sitting.

As MacWilliams raised his revolver one of the three, who was cooking
something over the fire, raised his head and with a yell of warning
flung himself toward his rifle.

"Up with your hands!" MacWilliams shouted in Spanish, and Langham,
running in, seized the nearest sentry by the neck and shoved his face
down between his knees into the sand.

There was a great rattle of falling stones and of breaking vines as the
sailors tumbled down the side of the fort, and in a half minute's time
the three sentries were looking with angry, frightened eyes at the
circle of armed men around them.

"Now gag them," said Clay.  "Does anybody here know how to gag a man?"
he asked.  "I don't."

"Better make him tell what he knows first," suggested Langham.

But the Spaniards were too terrified at what they had done, or at what
they had failed to do, to further commit themselves.

"Tie us and gag us," one of them begged.  "Let them find us so.  It is
the kindest thing you can do for us."

"Thank you, sir," said Clay.  "That is what I wanted to know. They are
coming to-night, then.  We must hurry."

The three sentries were bound and hidden at the base of the wall, with
a sailor to watch them.  He was a young man with a high sense of the
importance of his duties, and he enlivened the prisoners by poking them
in the ribs whenever they moved.

Clay deemed it impossible to signal Kirkland as they had arranged to
do, as they could not know now how near those who were coming for the
arms might be.  So MacWilliams was sent back for his engine, and a few
minutes later they heard it rumble heavily past the fort on its way to
bring up Kirkland and the flat cars.  Clay explored the lower chambers
of the fort and found the boxes as MacWilliams had described them.  Ten
men, with some effort, could lift and carry the larger coffin-shaped
boxes, and Clay guessed that, granting their contents to be rifles,
there must be a hundred pieces in each box, and that there were a
thousand rifles in all.

They had moved half of the boxes to the side of the track when the
train of flat cars and the two engines came crawling and twisting
toward them, between the walls of the jungle, like a great serpent,
with no light about it but the glow from the hot ashes as they fell
between the rails.  Thirty men, equally divided between Irish and
negroes, fell off the flat cars before the wheels had ceased to
revolve, and, without a word of direction, began loading the heavy
boxes on the train and passing the kegs of cartridges from hand to hand
and shoulder to shoulder.  The sailors spread out up the road that led
to the Capital to give warning in case the enemy approached, but they
were recalled before they had reason to give an alarm, and in a half
hour Burke's entire shipment of arms was on the ore-cars, the men who
were to have guarded them were prisoners in the cab of the engine, and
both trains were rushing at full speed toward the mines.  On arriving
there Kirkland's train was switched to the siding that led to the
magazine in which was stored the rack-arock and dynamite used in the
blasting.  By midnight all of the boxes were safely under lock in the
zinc building, and the number of the men who always guarded the place
for fear of fire or accident was doubled, while a reserve, composed of
Kirkland's thirty picked men, were hidden in the surrounding houses and
engine-sheds.

Before Clay left he had one of the boxes broken open, and found that it
held a hundred Mannlicher rifles.

"Good!" he said.  "I'd give a thousand dollars in gold if I could bring
Mendoza out here and show him his own men armed with his own
Mannlichers and dying for a shot at him.  How old Burke will enjoy this
when he hears of it!"

The party from the Palms returned to their engine after many promises
of reward to the men for their work "over-time," and were soon flying
back with their hearts as light as the smoke above them.

MacWilliams slackened speed as they neared the fort, and moved up
cautiously on the scene of their recent victory, but a warning cry from
Clay made him bring his engine to a sharp stop. Many lights were
flashing over the ruins and they could see in their reflection the
figures of men running over the same walls on which the lizards had
basked in undisturbed peace for years.

"They look like a swarm of hornets after some one has chucked a stone
through their nest," laughed MacWilliams.  "What shall we do now?  Go
back, or wait here, or run the blockade?"

"Oh, ride them out," said Langham; "the family's anxious, and I want to
tell them what's happened.  Go ahead."

Clay turned to the sailors in the car behind them.  "Lie down, men," he
said.  "And don't any of you fire unless I tell you to.  Let them do
all the shooting.  This isn't our fight yet, and, besides, they can't
hit a locomotive standing still, certainly not when it's going at full
speed."

"Suppose they've torn the track up?" said MacWilliams, grinning.  "We'd
look sort of silly flying through the air."

"Oh, they've not sense enough to think of that," said Clay. "Besides,
they don't know it was we who took their arms away, yet."

MacWilliams opened the throttle gently, and the train moved slowly
forward, gaining speed at each revolution of the wheels.

As the noise of its approach beat louder and louder on the air, a yell
of disappointed rage and execration rose into the night from the fort,
and a mass of soldiers swarmed upon the track, leaping up and down and
shaking the rifles in their hands.

"That sounds a little as though they thought we had something to do
with it," said MacWilliams, grimly.  "If they don't look out some one
will get hurt."

There was a flash of fire from where the mass of men stood, followed by
a dozen more flashes, and the bullets rattled on the smokestack and
upon the boiler of the engine.

"Low bridge," cried MacWilliams, with a fierce chuckle.  "Now, watch
her!"

He threw open the throttle as far as it would go, and the engine
answered to his touch like a race-horse to the whip.  It seemed to
spring from the track into the air.  It quivered and shook like a live
thing, and as it shot in between the soldiers they fell back on either
side, and MacWilliams leaned far out of his cab-window shaking his fist
at them.

"You got left, didn't you?" he shouted.  "Thank you for the
Mannlichers."

As the locomotive rushed out of the jungle, and passed the point on the
road nearest to the Palms, MacWilliams loosened three long triumphant
shrieks from his whistle and the sailors stood up and cheered.

"Let them shout," cried Clay.  "Everybody will have to know now.  It's
begun at last," he said, with a laugh of relief.

"And we took the first trick," said MacWilliams, as he ran his engine
slowly into the railroad yard.

The whistles of the engine and the shouts of the sailors had carried
far through the silence of the night, and as the men came hurrying
across the lawn to the Palms, they saw all of those who had been left
behind grouped on the veranda awaiting them.

"Do the conquering heroes come?" shouted King.

"They do," young Langham cried, joyously.  "We've got all their arms,
and they shot at us.  We've been under fire!"

"Are any of you hurt?" asked Miss Langham, anxiously, as she and the
others hurried down the steps to welcome them, while those of the
'Vesta's' crew who had been left behind looked at their comrades with
envy.

"We have been so frightened and anxious about you," said Miss Langham.

Hope held out her hand to Clay and greeted him with a quiet, happy
smile, that was in contrast to the excitement and confusion that
reigned about them.

"I knew you would come back safely," she said.  And the pressure of her
hand seemed to add "to me."



XII

The day of the review rose clear and warm, tempered by a light breeze
from the sea.  As it was a fete day, the harbor wore an air of unwonted
inactivity; no lighters passed heavily from the levees to the
merchantmen at anchor, and the warehouses along the wharves were closed
and deserted.  A thin line of smoke from the funnels of the 'Vesta'
showed that her fires were burning, and the fact that she rode on a
single anchor chain seemed to promise that at any moment she might slip
away to sea.

As Clay was finishing his coffee two notes were brought to him from
messengers who had ridden out that morning, and who sat in their
saddles looking at the armed force around the office with amused
intelligence.

One note was from Mendoza, and said he had decided not to call out the
regiment at the mines, as he feared their long absence from drill would
make them compare unfavorably with their comrades, and do him more harm
than credit.  "He is afraid of them since last night," was Clay's
comment, as he passed the note on to MacWilliams.  "He's quite right,
they might do him harm."

The second note was from Stuart.  He said the city was already wide
awake and restless, but whether this was due to the fact that it was a
fete day, or to some other cause which would disclose itself later, he
could not tell.  Madame Alvarez, the afternoon before, while riding in
the Alameda, had been insulted by a group of men around a caf, who had
risen and shouted after her, one of them throwing a wine-glass into her
lap as she rode past.  His troopers had charged the sidewalk and
carried off six of the men to the carcel.  He and Rojas had urged the
President to make every preparation for immediate flight, to have the
horses put to his travelling carriage, and had warned him when at the
review to take up his position at the point nearest to his own
body-guard, and as far as possible from the troops led by Mendoza.
Stuart added that he had absolute confidence in the former.  The
policeman who had attempted to carry Burke's note to Mendoza had
confessed that he was the only traitor in the camp, and that he had
tried to work on his comrades without success. Stuart begged Clay to
join him as quickly as possible.  Clay went up the hill to the Palms,
and after consulting with Mr. Langham, dictated an order to Kirkland,
instructing him to call the men together and to point out to them how
much better their condition had been since they had entered the mines,
and to promise them an increase of wages if they remained faithful to
Mr. Langham's interests, and a small pension to any one who might be
injured "from any cause whatsoever" while serving him.

"Tell them, if they are loyal, they can live in their shacks rent free
hereafter," wrote Clay.  "They are always asking for that.  It's a
cheap generosity," he added aloud to Mr. Langham, "because we've never
been able to collect rent from any of them yet."

At noon young Langham ordered the best three horses in the stables to
be brought to the door of the Palms for Clay, MacWilliams, and himself.
Clay's last words to King were to have the yacht in readiness to put to
sea when he telephoned him to do so, and he advised the women to have
their dresses and more valuable possessions packed ready to be taken on
board.

"Don't you think I might see the review if I went on horseback?" Hope
asked.  "I could get away then, if there should be any trouble."

Clay answered with a look of such alarm and surprise that Hope laughed.

"See the review!  I should say not," he exclaimed.  "I don't even want
Ted to be there."

"Oh, that's always the way," said Hope, "I miss everything.  I think
I'll come, however, anyhow.  The servants are all going, and I'll go
with them disguised in a turban."

As the men neared Valencia, Clay turned in his saddle, and asked
Langham if he thought his sister would really venture into the town.

"She'd better not let me catch her, if she does," the fond brother
replied.

The reviewing party left the Government Palace for the Alameda at three
o'clock, President Alvarez riding on horseback in advance, and Madame
Alvarez sitting in the State carriage with one of her attendants, and
with Stuart's troopers gathered so closely about her that the men's
boots scraped against the wheels, and their numbers hid her almost
entirely from sight.

The great square in which the evolutions were to take place was lined
on its four sides by the carriages of the wealthy Olanchoans, except at
the two gates, where there was a wide space left open to admit the
soldiers.  The branches of the trees on the edges of the bare parade
ground were black with men and boys, and the balconies and roofs of the
houses that faced it were gay with streamers and flags, and alive with
women wrapped for the occasion in their colored shawls.  Seated on the
grass between the carriages, or surging up and down behind them, were
thousands of people, each hurrying to gain a better place of vantage,
or striving to hold the one he had, and forming a restless, turbulent
audience in which all individual cries were lost in a great murmur of
laughter, and calls, and cheers.  The mass knit together, and pressed
forward as the President's band swung jauntily into the square and
halted in one corner, and a shout of expectancy went up from the trees
and housetops as the President's body-guard entered at the lower gate,
and the broken place in its ranks showed that it was escorting the
State carriage.  The troopers fell back on two sides, and the carriage,
with the President riding at its head, passed on, and took up a
position in front of the other carriages, and close to one of the sides
of the hollow square.  At Stuart's orders Clay, MacWilliams, and
Langham had pushed their horses into the rear rank of cavalry, and
remained wedged between the troopers within twenty feet of where Madame
Alvarez was sitting.  She was very white, and the powder on her face
gave her an added and unnatural pallor.  As the people cheered her
husband and herself she raised her head slightly and seemed to be
trying to catch any sound of dissent in their greeting, or some
possible undercurrent of disfavor, but the welcome appeared to be both
genuine and hearty, until a second shout smothered it completely as the
figure of old General Rojas, the Vice-President, and the most dearly
loved by the common people, came through the gate at the head of his
regiment.  There was such greeting for him that the welcome to the
President seemed mean in comparison, and it was with an embarrassment
which both felt that the two men drew near together, and each leaned
from his saddle to grasp the other's hand.  Madame Alvarez sank back
rigidly on her cushions, and her eyes flashed with anticipation and
excitement.  She drew her mantilla a little closer about her shoulders,
with a nervous shudder as though she were cold.  Suddenly the look of
anxiety in her eyes changed to one of annoyance, and she beckoned Clay
imperiously to the side of the carriage.

"Look," she said, pointing across the square.  "If I am not mistaken
that is Miss Langham, Miss Hope.  The one on the black horse--it must
be she, for none of the native ladies ride.  It is not safe for her to
be here alone.  Go," she commanded, "bring her here to me.  Put her
next to the carriage, or perhaps she will be safer with you among the
troopers."

Clay had recognized Hope before Madame Alvarez had finished speaking,
and dashed off at a gallop, skirting the line of carriages.  Hope had
stopped her horse beside a victoria, and was talking to the native
women who occupied it, and who were scandalized at her appearance in a
public place with no one but a groom to attend her.

"Why, it's the same thing as a polo match," protested Hope, as Clay
pulled up angrily beside the victoria.  "I always ride over to polo
alone at Newport, at least with James," she added, nodding her head
toward the servant.

The man approached Clay and touched his hat apologetically, "Miss Hope
would come, sir," he said, "and I thought I'd better be with her than
to go off and tell Mr. Langham, sir.  I knew she wouldn't wait for me."

"I asked you not to come," Clay said to Hope, in a low voice.

"I wanted to know the worst at once," she answered.  "I was anxious
about Ted--and you."

"Well, it can't be helped now," he said.  "Come, we must hurry, here is
our friend, the enemy."  He bowed to their acquaintances in the
victoria and they trotted briskly off to the side of the President's
carriage, just as a yell arose from the crowd that made all the other
shouts which had preceded it sound like the cheers of children at
recess.

"It reminds me of a football match," whispered young Langham,
excitedly, "when the teams run on the field.  Look at Alvarez and Rojas
watching Mendoza."

Mendoza advanced at the front of his three troops of cavalry, looking
neither to the left nor right, and by no sign acknowledging the fierce
uproarious greeting of the people. Close behind him came his chosen
band of cowboys and ruffians. They were the best equipped and least
disciplined soldiers in the army, and were, to the great relief of the
people, seldom seen in the city, but were kept moving in the mountain
passes and along the coast line, on the lookout for smugglers with whom
they were on the most friendly terms.  They were a picturesque body of
blackguards, in their hightopped boots and silver-tipped sombreros and
heavy, gaudy saddles, but the shout that had gone up at their advance
was due as much to the fear they inspired as to any great love for them
or their chief.

"Now all the chessmen are on the board, and the game can begin," said
Clay.  "It's like the scene in the play, where each man has his sword
at another man's throat and no one dares make the first move."  He
smiled as he noted, with the eye of one who had seen Continental troops
in action, the shuffling steps and slovenly carriage of the half-grown
soldiers that followed Mendoza's cavalry at a quick step.  Stuart's
picked men, over whom he had spent many hot and weary hours, looked
like a troop of Life Guardsmen in comparison.  Clay noted their
superiority, but he also saw that in numbers they were most woefully at
a disadvantage.

It was a brilliant scene for so modest a capital.  The sun flashed on
the trappings of the soldiers, on the lacquer and polished metal work
of the carriages; and the Parisian gowns of their occupants and the
fluttering flags and banners filled the air with color and movement,
while back of all, framing the parade ground with a band of black, was
the restless mob of people applauding the evolutions, and cheering for
their favorites, Alvarez, Mendoza, and Rojas, moved by an excitement
that was in disturbing contrast to the easy good-nature of their usual
manner.

The marching and countermarching of the troops had continued with
spirit for some time, and there was a halt in the evolutions which left
the field vacant, except for the presence of Mendoza's cavalrymen, who
were moving at a walk along one side of the quadrangle.  Alvarez and
Vice-President Rojas, with Stuart, as an adjutant at their side, were
sitting their horses within some fifty yards of the State carriage and
the body-guard.  Alvarez made a conspicuous contrast in his black coat
and high hat to the brilliant greens and reds of his generals'
uniforms, but he sat his saddle as well as either of the others, and
his white hair, white imperial and mustache, and the dignity of his
bearing distinguished him above them both.  Little Stuart, sitting at
his side, with his blue eyes glaring from under his white helmet and
his face burned to almost as red a tint as his curly hair, looked like
a fierce little bull-dog in comparison.  None of the three men spoke as
they sat motionless and quite alone waiting for the next movement of
the troops.

It proved to be one of moment.  Even before Mendoza had ridden toward
them with his sword at salute, Clay gave an exclamation of
enlightenment and concern.  He saw that the men who were believed to be
devoted to Rojas, had been halted and left standing at the farthest
corner of the plaza, nearly two hundred yards from where the President
had taken his place, that Mendoza's infantry surrounded them on every
side, and that Mendoza's cowboys, who had been walking their horses,
had wheeled and were coming up with an increasing momentum, a flying
mass of horses and men directed straight at the President himself.

Mendoza galloped up to Alvarez with his sword still in salute. His eyes
were burning with excitement and with the light of success.  No one but
Stuart and Rojas heard his words; to the spectators and to the army he
appeared as though he was, in his capacity of Commander-in-Chief,
delivering some brief report, or asking for instructions.

"Dr. Alvarez," he said, "as the head of the army I arrest you for high
treason; you have plotted to place yourself in office without popular
election.  You are also accused of large thefts of public funds.  I
must ask you to ride with me to the military prison.  General Rojas, I
regret that as an accomplice of the President's, you must come with us
also.  I will explain my action to the people when you are safe in
prison, and I will proclaim martial law.  If your troops attempt to
interfere, my men have orders to fire on them and you."

Stuart did not wait for his sentence.  He had heard the heavy beat of
the cavalry coming up on them at a trot.  He saw the ranks open and two
men catch at each bridle rein of both Alvarez and Rojas and drag them
on with them, buried in the crush of horses about them, and swept
forward by the weight and impetus of the moving mass behind.  Stuart
dashed off to the State carriage and seized the nearest of the horses
by the bridle.  "To the Palace!" he shouted to his men.  "Shoot any one
who tries to stop you.  Forward, at a gallop," he commanded.

The populace had not discovered what had occurred until it was
finished.  The coup d'etat had been long considered and the manner in
which it was to be carried out carefully planned.  The cavalry had
swept across the parade ground and up the street before the people saw
that they carried Rojas and Alvarez with them.  The regiment commanded
by Rojas found itself hemmed in before and behind by Mendoza's two
regiments.  They were greatly outnumbered, but they fired a scattering
shot, and following their captured leader, broke through the line
around them and pursued the cavalry toward the military prison.

It was impossible to tell in the uproar which followed how many or how
few had been parties to the plot.  The mob, shrieking and shouting and
leaping in the air, swarmed across the parade ground, and from a dozen
different points men rose above the heads of the people and harangued
them in violent speeches.  And while some of the soldiers and the
citizens gathered anxiously about these orators, others ran through the
city calling for the rescue of the President, for an attack on the
palace, and shrieking "Long live the Government!" and "Long live the
Revolution!"  The State carriage raced through the narrow streets with
its body-guard galloping around it, sweeping down in its rush stray
pedestrians, and scattering the chairs and tables in front of the
cafs.  As it dashed up the long avenue of the palace, Stuart called
his men back and ordered them to shut and barricade the great iron
gates and to guard them against the coming of the mob, while
MacWilliams and young Langham pulled open the carriage door and
assisted the President's wife and her terrified companion to alight.
Madame Alvarez was trembling with excitement as she leaned on Langham's
arm, but she showed no signs of fear in her face or in her manner.

"Mr. Clay has gone to bring your travelling carriage to the rear door,"
Langham said.  "Stuart tells us it is harnessed and ready.  You will
hurry, please, and get whatever you need to carry with you.  We will
see you safely to the coast."

As they entered the hall, and were ascending the great marble stairway,
Hope and her groom, who had followed in the rear of the cavalry, came
running to meet them.  "I got in by the back way," Hope explained.
"The streets there are all deserted. How can I help you?" she asked,
eagerly.

"By leaving me," cried the older woman.  "Good God, child, have I not
enough to answer for without dragging you into this? Go home at once
through the botanical garden, and then by way of the wharves.  That
part of the city is still empty."

"Where are your servants; why are they not here?" Hope demanded without
heeding her.  The palace was strangely empty; no footsteps came running
to greet them, no doors opened or shut as they hurried to Madame
Alvarez's apartments.  The servants of the household had fled at the
first sound of the uproar in the city, and the dresses and ornaments
scattered on the floor told that they had not gone empty-handed.  The
woman who had accompanied Madame Alvarez to the review sank weeping on
the bed, and then, as the shouts grew suddenly louder and more near,
ran to hide herself in the upper stories of the house.  Hope crossed to
the window and saw a great mob of soldiers and citizens sweep around
the corner and throw themselves against the iron fence of the palace.
"You will have to hurry," she said.  "Remember, you are risking the
lives of those boys by your delay."

There was a large bed in the room, and Madame Alvarez had pulled it
forward and was bending over a safe that had opened in the wall, and
which had been hidden by the head board of the bed. She held up a
bundle of papers in her hand, wrapped in a leather portfolio.  "Do you
see these?" she cried, "they are drafts for five millions of dollars."
She tossed them back into the safe and swung the door shut.

"You are a witness.  I do not take them," she said.

"I don't understand," Hope answered, "but hurry.  Have you everything
you want--have you your jewels?"

"Yes," the woman answered, as she rose to her feet, "they are mine."

A yell more loud and terrible than any that had gone before rose from
the garden below, and there was the sound of iron beating against iron,
and cries of rage and execration from a great multitude.

"I will not go!" the Spanish woman cried, suddenly.  "I will not leave
Alvarez to that mob.  If they want to kill me, let them kill me."  She
threw the bag that held her jewels on the bed, and pushing open the
window stepped out upon the balcony.  She was conspicuous in her black
dress against the yellow stucco of the wall, and in an instant the mob
saw her and a mad shout of exultation and anger rose from the mass that
beat and crushed itself against the high iron railings of the garden.
Hope caught the woman by the skirt and dragged her back.  "You are
mad," she said.  "What good can you do your husband here?  Save
yourself and he will come to you when he can.  There is nothing you can
do for him now; you cannot give your life for him.  You are wasting it,
and you are risking the lives of the men who are waiting for us below.
Come, I tell you."

MacWilliams left Clay waiting beside the diligence and ran from the
stable through the empty house and down the marble stairs to the garden
without meeting any one on his way.  He saw Stuart helping and
directing his men to barricade the gates with iron urns and garden
benches and sentry-boxes.  Outside the mob were firing at him with
their revolvers, and calling him foul names, but Stuart did not seem to
hear them.  He greeted MacWilliams with a cheerful little laugh.
"Well," he asked, "is she ready?"

"No, but we are.  Clay and I've been waiting there for five minutes.
We found Miss Hope's groom and sent him back to the Palms with a
message to King.  We told him to run the yacht to Los Bocos and lie off
shore until we came.  He is to take her on down the coast to Truxillo,
where our man-of-war is lying, and they will give her shelter as a
political refugee."

"Why don't you drive her to the Palms at once?" demanded Stuart,
anxiously, "and take her on board the yacht there?  It is ten miles to
Bocos and the roads are very bad."

"Clay says we could never get her through the city," MacWilliams
answered.  "We should have to fight all the way. But the city to the
south is deserted, and by going out by the back roads, we can make
Bocos by ten o'clock to-night.  The yacht should reach there by seven."

"You are right; go back.  I will call off some of my men.  The rest
must hold this mob back until you start; then I will follow with the
others.  Where is Miss Hope?"

"We don't know.  Clay is frantic.  Her groom says she is somewhere in
the palace."

"Hurry," Stuart commanded.  "If Mendoza gets here before Madame Alvarez
leaves, it will be too late."

MacWilliams sprang up the steps of the palace, and Stuart, calling to
the men nearest him to follow, started after him on a run.

As Stuart entered the palace with his men at his heels, Clay was
hurrying from its rear entrance along the upper hall, and Hope and
Madame Alvarez were leaving the apartments of the latter at its front.
They met at the top of the main stairway just as Stuart put his foot on
its lower step.  The young Englishman heard the clatter of his men
following close behind him and leaped eagerly forward.  Half way to the
top the noise behind him ceased, and turning his head quickly he looked
back over his shoulder and saw that the men had halted at the foot of
the stairs and stood huddled together in disorder looking up at him.
Stuart glanced over their heads and down the hallway to the garden
beyond to see if they were followed, but the mob still fought from the
outer side of the barricade.  He waved his sword impatiently and
started forward again.  "Come on!" he shouted. But the men below him
did not move.  Stuart halted once more and this time turned about and
looked down upon them with surprise and anger.  There was not one of
them he could not have called by name.  He knew all their little
troubles, their love-affairs, even.  They came to him for comfort and
advice, and to beg for money.  He had regarded them as his children,
and he was proud of them as soldiers because they were the work of his
hands.

So, instead of a sharp command, he asked, "What is it?" in surprise,
and stared at them wondering.  He could not or would not comprehend,
even though he saw that those in the front rank were pushing back and
those behind were urging them forward.  The muzzles of their carbines
were directed at every point, and on their faces fear and hate and
cowardice were written in varying likenesses.

"What does this mean?" Stuart demanded, sharply.  "What are you waiting
for?"

Clay had just reached the top of the stairs.  He saw Madame Alvarez and
Hope coming toward him, and at the sight of Hope he gave an exclamation
of relief.

Then his eyes turned and fell on the tableau below, on Stuart's back,
as he stood confronting the men, and on their scowling upturned faces
and half-lifted carbines.  Clay had lived for a longer time among
Spanish-Americans than had the English subaltern, or else he was the
quicker of the two to believe in evil and ingratitude, for he gave a
cry of warning, and motioned the women away.

"Stuart!" he cried.  "Come away; for God's sake, what are you doing?
Come back!"

The Englishman started at the sound of his friend's voice, but he did
not turn his head.  He began to descend the stairs slowly, a step at a
time, staring at the mob so fiercely that they shrank back before the
look of wounded pride and anger in his eyes. Those in the rear raised
and levelled their rifles.  Without taking his eyes from theirs, Stuart
drew his revolver, and with his sword swinging from its wrist-strap,
pointed his weapon at the mass below him.

"What does this mean?" he demanded.  "Is this mutiny?"

A voice from the rear of the crowd of men shrieked:  "Death to the
Spanish woman.  Death to all traitors.  Long live Mendoza," and the
others echoed the cry in chorus.

Clay sprang down the broad stairs calling, "Come to me;" but before he
could reach Stuart, a woman's voice rang out, in a long terrible cry of
terror, a cry that was neither a prayer nor an imprecation, but which
held the agony of both.  Stuart started, and looked up to where Madame
Alvarez had thrown herself toward him across the broad balustrade of
the stairway.  She was silent with fear, and her hand clutched at the
air, as she beckoned wildly to him.  Stuart stared at her with a
troubled smile and waved his empty hand to reassure her.  The movement
was final, for the men below, freed from the reproach of his eyes,
flung up their carbines and fired, some wildly, without placing their
guns at rest, and others steadily and aiming straight at his heart.

As the volley rang out and the smoke drifted up the great staircase,
the subaltern's hands tossed high above his head, his body sank into
itself and toppled backward, and, like a tired child falling to sleep,
the defeated soldier of fortune dropped back into the outstretched arms
of his friend.

Clay lifted him upon his knee, and crushed him closer against his
breast with one arm, while he tore with his free hand at the stock
about the throat and pushed his fingers in between the buttons of the
tunic.  They came forth again wet and colored crimson.

"Stuart!" Clay gasped.  "Stuart, speak to me, look at me!" He shook the
body in his arms with fierce roughness, peering into the face that
rested on his shoulder, as though he could command the eyes back again
to light and life.  "Don't leave me!" he said.  "For God's sake, old
man, don't leave me!"

But the head on his shoulder only sank the closer and the body
stiffened in his arms.  Clay raised his eyes and saw the soldiers still
standing, irresolute and appalled at what they had done, and awe-struck
at the sight of the grief before them.

Clay gave a cry as terrible as the cry of a woman who has seen her
child mangled before her eyes, and lowering the body quickly to the
steps, he ran at the scattering mass below him.  As he came they fled
down the corridor, shrieking and calling to their friends to throw open
the gates and begging them to admit the mob.  When they reached the
outer porch they turned, encouraged by the touch of numbers, and halted
to fire at the man who still followed them.

Clay stopped, with a look in his eyes which no one who knew them had
ever seen there, and smiled with pleasure in knowing himself a master
in what he had to do.  And at each report of his revolver one of
Stuart's assassins stumbled and pitched heavily forward on his face.
Then he turned and walked slowly back up the hall to the stairway like
a man moving in his sleep.  He neither saw nor heard the bullets that
bit spitefully at the walls about him and rattled among the glass
pendants of the great chandeliers above his head.  When he came to the
step on which the body lay he stooped and picked it up gently, and
holding it across his breast, strode on up the stairs.  MacWilliams and
Langham were coming toward him, and saw the helpless figure in his arms.

"What is it?" they cried; "is he wounded, is he hurt?"

"He is dead," Clay answered, passing on with his burden.  "Get Hope
away."

Madame Alvarez stood with the girl's arms about her, her eyes closed
and her figure trembling.

"Let me be!" she moaned.  "Don't touch me; let me die.  My God, what
have I to live for now?"  She shook off Hope's supporting arm, and
stood before them, all her former courage gone, trembling and shivering
in agony.  "I do not care what they do to me!" she cried.  She tore her
lace mantilla from her shoulders and threw it on the floor.  "I shall
not leave this place.  He is dead.  Why should I go?  He is dead.  They
have murdered him; he is dead."

"She is fainting," said Hope.  Her voice was strained and hard.

To her brother she seemed to have grown suddenly much older, and he
looked to her to tell him what to do.

"Take hold of her," she said.  "She will fall."  The woman sank back
into the arms of the men, trembling and moaning feebly.

"Now carry her to the carriage," said Hope.  "She has fainted; it is
better; she does not know what has happened."

Clay, still bearing the body in his arms, pushed open the first door
that stood ajar before him with his foot.  It opened into the great
banqueting hall of the palace, but he could not choose.

He had to consider now the safety of the living, whose lives were still
in jeopardy.

The long table in the centre of the hall was laid with places for many
people, for it had been prepared for the President and the President's
guests, who were to have joined with him in celebrating the successful
conclusion of the review.  From outside the light of the sun, which was
just sinking behind the mountains, shone dimly upon the silver on the
board, on the glass and napery, and the massive gilt centre-pieces
filled with great clusters of fresh flowers.  It looked as though the
servants had but just left the room.  Even the candles had been lit in
readiness, and as their flames wavered and smoked in the evening breeze
they cast uncertain shadows on the walls and showed the stern faces of
the soldier presidents frowning down on the crowded table from their
gilded frames.

There was a great leather lounge stretching along one side of the hall,
and Clay moved toward this quickly and laid his burden down.  He was
conscious that Hope was still following him.  He straightened the limbs
of the body and folded the arms across the breast and pressed his hand
for an instant on the cold hands of his friend, and then whispering
something between his lips, turned and walked hurriedly away.

Hope confronted him in the doorway.  She was sobbing silently. "Must we
leave him," she pleaded, "must we leave him--like this?"

From the garden there came the sound of hammers ringing on the iron
hinges, and a great crash of noises as the gate fell back from its
fastenings, and the mob rushed over the obstacles upon which it had
fallen.  It seemed as if their yells of exultation and anger must reach
even the ears of the dead man.

"They are calling Mendoza," Clay whispered, "he must be with them.
Come, we will have to run for our lives now."

But before he could guess what Hope was about to do, or could prevent
her, she had slipped past him and picked up Stuart's sword that had
fallen from his wrist to the floor, and laid it on the soldier's body,
and closed his hands upon its hilt.  She glanced quickly about her as
though looking for something, and then with a sob of relief ran to the
table, and sweeping it of an armful of its flowers, stepped swiftly
back again to the lounge and heaped them upon it.

"Come, for God's sake, come!" Clay called to her in a whisper from the
door.

Hope stood for an instant staring at the young Englishman as the
candle-light flickered over his white face, and then, dropping on her
knees, she pushed back the curly hair from about the boy's forehead and
kissed him.  Then, without turning to look again, she placed her hand
in Clay's and he ran with her, dragging her behind him down the length
of the hall, just as the mob entered it on the floor below them and
filled the palace with their shouts of triumph.

As the sun sank lower its light fell more dimly on the lonely figure in
the vast dining-hall, and as the gloom deepened there, the candles
burned with greater brilliancy, and the faces of the portraits shone
more clearly.

They seemed to be staring down less sternly now upon the white mortal
face of the brother-in-arms who had just joined them.

One who had known him among his own people would have seen in the
attitude and in the profile of the English soldier a likeness to his
ancestors of the Crusades who lay carved in stone in the village
church, with their faces turned to the sky, their faithful hounds
waiting at their feet, and their hands pressed upward in prayer.

And when, a moment later, the half-crazed mob of men and boys swept
into the great room, with Mendoza at their head, something of the
pathos of the young Englishman's death in his foreign place of exile
must have touched them, for they stopped appalled and startled, and
pressed back upon their fellows, with eager whispers.  The
Spanish-American General strode boldly forward, but his eyes lowered
before the calm, white face, and either because the lighted candles and
the flowers awoke in him some memory of the great Church that had
nursed him, or because the jagged holes in the soldier's tunic appealed
to what was bravest in him, he crossed himself quickly, and then
raising his hands slowly to his visor, lifted his hat and pointed with
it to the door.  And the mob, without once looking back at the rich
treasure of silver on the table, pushed out before him, stepping
softly, as though they had intruded on a shrine.



XIII

The President's travelling carriage was a double-seated diligence
covered with heavy hoods and with places on the box for two men. Only
one of the coachmen, the same man who had driven the State carriage
from the review, had remained at the stables.  As he knew the roads to
Los Bocos, Clay ordered him up to the driver's seat, and MacWilliams
climbed into the place beside him after first storing three rifles
under the lap-robe.

Hope pulled open the leather curtains of the carriage and found Madame
Alvarez where the men had laid her upon the cushions, weak and
hysterical.  The girl crept in beside her, and lifting her in her arms,
rested the older woman's head against her shoulder, and soothed and
comforted her with tenderness and sympathy.

Clay stopped with his foot in the stirrup and looked up anxiously at
Langham who was already in the saddle.

"Is there no possible way of getting Hope out of this and back to the
Palms?" he asked.

"No, it's too late.  This is the only way now."  Hope opened the
leather curtains and looking out shook her head impatiently at Clay.
"I wouldn't go now if there were another way," she said.  "I couldn't
leave her like this."

"You're delaying the game, Clay," cried Langham, warningly, as he stuck
his spurs into his pony's side.

The people in the diligence lurched forward as the horses felt the lash
of the whip and strained against the harness, and then plunged ahead at
a gallop on their long race to the sea.  As they sped through the
gardens, the stables and the trees hid them from the sight of those in
the palace, and the turf, upon which the driver had turned the horses
for greater safety, deadened the sound of their flight.

They found the gates of the botanical gardens already opened, and Clay,
in the street outside, beckoning them on.  Without waiting for the
others the two outriders galloped ahead to the first cross street,
looked up and down its length, and then, in evident concern at what
they saw in the distance, motioned the driver to greater speed, and
crossing the street signalled him to follow them.  At the next corner
Clay flung himself off his pony, and throwing the bridle to Langham,
ran ahead into the cross street on foot, and after a quick glance
pointed down its length away from the heart of the city to the
mountains.

The driver turned as Clay directed him, and when the man found that his
face was fairly set toward the goal he lashed his horses recklessly
through the narrow street, so that the murmur of the mob behind them
grew perceptibly fainter at each leap forward.

The noise of the galloping hoofs brought women and children to the
barred windows of the houses, but no men stepped into the road to stop
their progress, and those few they met running in the direction of the
palace hastened to get out of their way, and stood with their backs
pressed against the walls of the narrow thoroughfare looking after them
with wonder.

Even those who suspected their errand were helpless to detain them, for
sooner than they could raise the hue and cry or formulate a plan of
action, the carriage had passed and was disappearing in the distance,
rocking from wheel to wheel like a ship in a gale.  Two men who were so
bold as to start to follow, stopped abruptly when they saw the
outriders draw rein and turn in their saddles as though to await their
coming.

Clay's mind was torn with doubts, and his nerves were drawn taut like
the strings of a violin.  Personal danger exhilarated him, but this
chance of harm to others who were helpless, except for him, depressed
his spirit with anxiety.  He experienced in his own mind all the
nervous fears of a thief who sees an officer in every passing citizen,
and at one moment he warned the driver to move more circumspectly, and
so avert suspicion, and the next urged him into more desperate bursts
of speed.  In his fancy every cross street threatened an ambush, and as
he cantered now before and now behind the carriage, he wished that he
was a multitude of men who could encompass it entirely and hide it.

But the solid streets soon gave way to open places, and low mud cabins,
where the horses' hoofs beat on a sun-baked road, and where the
inhabitants sat lazily before the door in the fading light, with no
knowledge of the changes that the day had wrought in the city, and with
only a moment's curious interest in the hooded carriage, and the grim,
white-faced foreigners who guarded it.

Clay turned his pony into a trot at Langham's side.  His face was pale
and drawn.

As the danger of immediate pursuit and capture grew less, the carriage
had slackened its pace, and for some minutes the outriders galloped on
together side by side in silence.  But the same thought was in the mind
of each, and when Langham spoke it was as though he were continuing
where he had but just been interrupted.

He laid his hand gently on Clay's arm.  He did not turn his face toward
him, and his eyes were still peering into the shadows before them.
"Tell me?" he asked.

"He was coming up the stairs," Clay answered.  He spoke in so low a
voice that Langham had to lean from his saddle to hear him. "They were
close behind; but when they saw her they stopped and refused to go
farther.  I called to him to come away, but he would not understand.
They killed him before he really understood what they meant to do.  He
was dead almost before I reached him.  He died in my arms."  There was
a long pause.  "I wonder if he knows that?" Clay said.

Langham sat erect in the saddle again and drew a short breath. "I wish
he could have known how he helped me," he whispered, "how much just
knowing him helped me."

Clay bowed his head to the boy as though he were thanking him. "His was
the gentlest soul I ever knew," he said.

"That's what I wanted to say," Langham answered.  "We will let that be
his epitaph," and touching his spur to his horse he galloped on ahead
and left Clay riding alone.

Langham had proceeded for nearly a mile when he saw the forest opening
before them, and at the sight he gave a shout of relief, but almost at
the same instant he pulled his pony back on his haunches and whirling
him about, sprang back to the carriage with a cry of warning.

"There are soldiers ahead of us," he cried.  "Did you know it?" he
demanded of the driver.  "Did you lie to me?  Turn back."

"He can't turn back," MacWilliams answered.  "They have seen us.  They
are only the custom officers at the city limits.  They know nothing.
Go on."  He reached forward and catching the reins dragged the horses
down into a walk.  Then he handed the reins back to the driver with a
shake of the head.

"If you know these roads as well as you say you do, you want to keep us
out of the way of soldiers," he said.  "If we fall into a trap you'll
be the first man shot on either side."

A sentry strolled lazily out into the road dragging his gun after him
by the bayonet, and raised his hand for them to halt.  His captain
followed him from the post-house throwing away a cigarette as he came,
and saluted MacWilliams on the box and bowed to the two riders in the
background.  In his right hand he held one of the long iron rods with
which the collectors of the city's taxes were wont to pierce the
bundles and packs, and even the carriage cushions of those who entered
the city limits from the coast, and who might be suspected of smuggling.

"Whose carriage is this, and where is it going?" he asked.

As the speed of the diligence slackened, Hope put her head out of the
curtains, and as she surveyed the soldier with apparent surprise, she
turned to her brother.

"What does this mean?" she asked.  "What are we waiting for?"

"We are going to the Hacienda of Senor Palacio," MacWilliams said, in
answer to the officer.  "The driver thinks that this is the road, but I
say we should have taken the one to the right."

"No, this is the road to Senor Palacio's plantation," the officer
answered, "but you cannot leave the city without a pass signed by
General Mendoza.  That is the order we received this morning.  Have you
such a pass?"

"Certainly not," Clay answered, warmly.  "This is the carriage of an
American, the president of the mines.  His daughters are inside and on
their way to visit the residence of Senor Palacio.  They are
foreigners--Americans.  We are all foreigners, and we have a perfect
right to leave the city when we choose.  You can only stop us when we
enter it."

The officer looked uncertainly from Clay to Hope and up at the driver
on the box.  His eyes fell upon the heavy brass mountings of the
harness.  They bore the arms of Olancho.  He wheeled sharply and called
to his men inside the post-house, and they stepped out from the veranda
and spread themselves leisurely across the road.

"Ride him down, Clay," Langham muttered, in a whisper.  The officer did
not understand the words, but he saw Clay gather the reins tighter in
his hands and he stepped back quickly to the safety of the porch, and
from that ground of vantage smiled pleasantly.

"Pardon," he said, "there is no need for blows when one is rich enough
to pay.  A little something for myself and a drink for my brave
fellows, and you can go where you please."

"Damned brigands," growled Langham, savagely.

"Not at all," Clay answered.  "He is an officer and a gentleman.  I
have no money with me," he said, in Spanish, addressing the officer,
"but between caballeros a word of honor is sufficient.  I shall be
returning this way to-morrow morning, and I will bring a few hundred
sols from Senor Palacio for you and your men; but if we are followed
you will get nothing, and you must have forgotten in the mean time that
you have seen us pass."

There was a murmur inside the carriage, and Hope's face disappeared
from between the curtains to reappear again almost immediately.  She
beckoned to the officer with her hand, and the men saw that she held
between her thumb and little finger a diamond ring of size and
brilliancy.  She moved it so that it flashed in the light of the guard
lantern above the post-house.

"My sister tells me you shall be given this tomorrow morning," Hope
said, "if we are not followed."

The man's eyes laughed with pleasure.  He swept his sombrero to the
ground.

"I am your servant, Senorita," he said.  "Gentlemen," he cried, gayly,
turning to Clay, "if you wish it, I will accompany you with my men.
Yes, I will leave word that I have gone in the sudden pursuit of
smugglers; or I will remain here as you wish, and send those who may
follow back again."

"You are most gracious, sir," said Clay.  "It is always a pleasure to
meet with a gentleman and a philosopher.  We prefer to travel without
an escort, and remember, you have seen nothing and heard nothing."  He
leaned from the saddle, and touched the officer on the breast.  "That
ring is worth a king's ransom."

"Or a president's," muttered the man, smiling.  "Let the American
ladies pass," he commanded.

The soldiers scattered as the whip fell, and the horses once more
leaped forward, and as the carriage entered the forest, Clay looked
back and saw the officer exhaling the smoke of a fresh cigarette, with
the satisfaction of one who enjoys a clean conscience and a sense of
duty well performed.

The road through the forest was narrow and uneven, and as the horses
fell into a trot the men on horseback closed up together behind the
carriage.

"Do you think that road-agent will keep his word?" Langham asked.

"Yes; he has nothing to win by telling the truth," Clay answered.  "He
can say he saw a party of foreigners, Americans, driving in the
direction of Palacio's coffee plantation.  That lets him out, and in
the morning he knows he can levy on us for the gate money.  I am not so
much afraid of being overtaken as I am that King may make a mistake and
not get to Bocos on time.  We ought to reach there, if the carriage
holds together, by eleven. King should be there by eight o'clock, and
the yacht ought to make the run to Truxillo in three hours.  But we
shall not be able to get back to the city before five to-morrow
morning.  I suppose your family will be wild about Hope.  We didn't
know where she was when we sent the groom back to King."

"Do you think that driver is taking us the right way?" Langham asked,
after a pause.

"He'd better.  He knows it well enough.  He was through the last
revolution, and carried messages from Los Bocos to the city on foot for
two months.  He has covered every trail on the way, and if he goes
wrong he knows what will happen to him."

"And Los Bocos--it is a village, isn't it, and the landing must be in
sight of the Custom-house?"

"The village lies some distance back from the shore, and the only house
on the beach is the Custom-house itself; but every one will be asleep
by the time we get there, and it will take us only a minute to hand her
into the launch.  If there should be a guard there, King will have
fixed them one way or another by the time we arrive.  Anyhow, there is
no need of looking for trouble that far ahead.  There is enough to
worry about in between.  We haven't got there yet."

The moon rose grandly a few minutes later, and flooded the forest with
light so that the open places were as clear as day.  It threw strange
shadows across the trail, and turned the rocks and fallen trees into
figures of men crouching or standing upright with uplifted arms.  They
were so like to them that Clay and Langham flung their carbines to
their shoulders again and again, and pointed them at some black object
that turned as they advanced into wood or stone.  From the forest they
came to little streams and broad shallow rivers where the rocks in the
fording places churned the water into white masses of foam, and the
horses kicked up showers of spray as they made their way, slipping and
stumbling, against the current.  It was a silent pilgrim age, and never
for a moment did the strain slacken or the men draw rein.  Sometimes,
as they hurried across a broad tableland, or skirted the edge of a
precipice and looked down hundreds of feet below at the shining waters
they had just forded, or up at the rocky points of the mountains before
them, the beauty of the night overcame them and made them forget the
significance of their journey.

They were not always alone, for they passed at intervals through
sleeping villages of mud huts with thatched roofs, where the dogs ran
yelping out to bark at them, and where the pine-knots, blazing on the
clay ovens, burned cheerily in the moonlight.  In the low lands where
the fever lay, the mist rose above the level of their heads and
enshrouded them in a curtain of fog, and the dew fell heavily,
penetrating their clothing and chilling their heated bodies so that the
sweating horses moved in a lather of steam.

They had settled down into a steady gallop now, and ten or fifteen
miles had been left behind them.

"We are making excellent time," said Clay.  "The village of San Lorenzo
should lie beyond that ridge."  He drove up beside the driver and
pointed with his whip.  "Is not that San Lorenzo?" he asked.

"Yes, senor," the man answered, "but I mean to drive around it by the
old wagon trail.  It is a large town, and people may be awake.  You
will be able to see it from the top of the next hill."

The cavalcade stopped at the summit of the ridge and the men looked
down into the silent village.  It was like the others they had passed,
with a few houses built round a square of grass that could hardly be
recognized as a plaza, except for the church on its one side, and the
huge wooden cross planted in its centre. From the top of the hill they
could see that the greater number of the houses were in darkness, but
in a large building of two stories lights were shining from every
window.

"That is the comandancia," said the driver, shaking his head.  "They
are still awake.  It is a telegraph station."

"Great Scott!" exclaimed MacWilliams.  "We forgot the telegraph.  They
may have sent word to head us off already."

"Nine o'clock is not so very late," said Clay.  "It may mean nothing."

"We had better make sure, though," MacWilliams answered, jumping to the
ground.  "Lend me your pony, Ted, and take my place.  I'll run in there
and dust around and see what's up. I'll join you on the other side of
the town after you get back to the main road."

"Wait a minute," said Clay.  "What do you mean to do?"

"I can't tell till I get there, but I'll try to find out how much they
know.  Don't you be afraid.  I'll run fast enough if there's any sign
of trouble.  And if you come across a telegraph wire, cut it.  The
message may not have gone over yet."

The two women in the carriage had parted the flaps of the hoods and
were trying to hear what was being said, but could not understand, and
Langham explained to them that they were about to make a slight detour
to avoid San Lorenzo while MacWilliams was going into it to
reconnoitre.  He asked if they were comfortable, and assured them that
the greater part of the ride was over, and that there was a good road
from San Lorenzo to the sea.

MacWilliams rode down into the village along the main trail, and threw
his reins over a post in front of the comandancia.  He mounted boldly
to the second floor of the building and stopped at the head of the
stairs, in front of an open door.  There were three men in the room
before him, one an elderly man, whom he rightly guessed was the
comandante, and two younger men who were standing behind a railing and
bending over a telegraph instrument on a table.  As he stamped into the
room, they looked up and stared at him in surprise; their faces showed
that he had interrupted them at a moment of unusual interest.

MacWilliams saluted the three men civilly, and, according to the native
custom, apologized for appearing before them in his spurs.

He had been riding from Los Bocos to the capital, he said, and his
horse had gone lame.  Could they tell him if there was any one in the
village from whom he could hire a mule, as he must push on to the
capital that night?

The comandante surveyed him for a moment, as though still disturbed by
the interruption, and then shook his head impatiently.  "You can hire a
mule from one Pulido Paul, at the corner of the plaza," he said.  And
as MacWilliams still stood uncertainly, he added, "You say you have
come from Los Bocos.  Did you meet any one on your way?"

The two younger men looked up at him anxiously, but before he could
answer, the instrument began to tick out the signal, and they turned
their eyes to it again, and one of them began to take its message down
on paper.

The instrument spoke to MacWilliams also, for he was used to sending
telegrams daily from the office to the mines, and could make it talk
for him in either English or Spanish.  So, in his effort to hear what
it might say, he stammered and glanced at it involuntarily, and the
comandante, without suspecting his reason for doing so, turned also and
peered over the shoulder of the man who was receiving the message.
Except for the clicking of the instrument, the room was absolutely
still; the three men bent silently over the table, while MacWilliams
stood gazing at the ceiling and turning his hat in his hands.  The
message MacWilliams read from the instrument was this:  "They are
reported to have left the city by the south, so they are going to Para,
or San Pedro, or to Los Bocos.  She must be stopped--take an armed
force and guard the roads.  If necessary, kill her.  She has in the
carriage or hidden on her person, drafts for five million sols.  You
will be held responsible for every one of them.  Repeat this message to
show you understand, and relay it to Los Bocos.  If you fail--"

MacWilliams could not wait to hear more; he gave a curt nod to the men
and started toward the stairs.  "Wait," the comandante called after him.

MacWilliams paused with one hand on top of the banisters balancing
himself in readiness for instant flight.

"You have not answered me.  Did you meet with any one on your ride here
from Los Bocos?"

"I met several men on foot, and the mail carrier passed me a league out
from the coast, and oh, yes, I met a carriage at the cross roads, and
the driver asked me the way of San Pedro Sula."

"A carriage?--yes--and what did you tell him?"

"I told him he was on the road to Los Bocos, and he turned back and--"

"You are sure he turned back?"

"Certainly, sir.  I rode behind him for some distance.  He turned
finally to the right into the trail to San Pedro Sula."

The man flung himself across the railing.

"Quick," he commanded, "telegraph to Morales, Comandante San Pedro
Sula--"

He had turned his back on MacWilliams, and as the younger man bent over
the instrument, MacWilliams stepped softly down the stairs, and
mounting his pony rode slowly off in the direction of the capital.  As
soon as he had reached the outskirts of the town, he turned and
galloped round it and then rode fast with his head in air, glancing up
at the telegraph wire that sagged from tree-trunk to tree-trunk along
the trail.  At a point where he thought he could dismount in safety and
tear down the wire, he came across it dangling from the branches and he
gave a shout of relief.  He caught the loose end and dragged it free
from its support, and then laying it across a rock pounded the blade of
his knife upon it with a stone, until he had hacked off a piece some
fifty feet in length.  Taking this in his hand he mounted again and
rode off with it, dragging the wire in the road behind him.  He held it
up as he rejoined Clay, and laughed triumphantly.  "They'll have some
trouble splicing that circuit," he said, "you only half did the work.
What wouldn't we give to know all this little piece of copper knows,
eh?"

"Do you mean you think they have telegraphed to Los Bocos already?"

"I know that they were telegraphing to San Pedro Sula as I left and to
all the coast towns.  But whether you cut this down before or after is
what I should like to know."

"We shall probably learn that later," said Clay, grimly.

The last three miles of the journey lay over a hard, smooth road, wide
enough to allow the carriage and its escort to ride abreast.

It was in such contrast to the tortuous paths they had just followed,
that the horses gained a fresh impetus and galloped forward as freely
as though the race had but just begun.

Madame Alvarez stopped the carriage at one place and asked the men to
lower the hood at the back that she might feel the fresh air and see
about her, and when this had been done, the women seated themselves
with their backs to the horses where they could look out at the moonlit
road as it unrolled behind them.

Hope felt selfishly and wickedly happy.  The excitement had kept her
spirits at the highest point, and the knowledge that Clay was guarding
and protecting her was in itself a pleasure.  She leaned back on the
cushions and put her arm around the older woman's waist, and listened
to the light beat of his pony's hoofs outside, now running ahead, now
scrambling and slipping up some steep place, and again coming to a halt
as Langham or MacWilliams called, "Look to the right, behind those
trees," or "Ahead there!  Don't you see what I mean, something
crouching?"

She did not know when the false alarms would turn into a genuine
attack, but she was confident that when the time came he would take
care of her, and she welcomed the danger because it brought that solace
with it.

Madame Alvarez sat at her side, rigid, silent, and beyond the help of
comfort.  She tortured herself with thoughts of the ambitions she had
held, and which had been so cruelly mocked that very morning; of the
chivalric love that had been hers, of the life even that had been hers,
and which had been given up for her so tragically.  When she spoke at
all, it was to murmur her sorrow that Hope had exposed herself to
danger on her poor account, and that her life, as far as she loved it,
was at an end.  Only once after the men had parted the curtains and
asked concerning her comfort with grave solicitude did she give way to
tears.

"Why are they so good to me?" she moaned.  "Why are you so good to me?
I am a wicked, vain woman, I have brought a nation to war and I have
killed the only man I ever trusted."

Hope touched her gently with her hand and felt guiltily how selfish she
herself must be not to feel the woman's grief, but she could not.  She
only saw in it a contrast to her own happiness, a black background
before which the figure of Clay and his solicitude for her shone out,
the only fact in the world that was of value.

Her thoughts were interrupted by the carriage coming to a halt, and a
significant movement upon the part of the men.  MacWilliams had
descended from the box-seat and stepping into the carriage took the
place the women had just left.

He had a carbine in his hand, and after he was seated Langham handed
him another which he laid across his knees.

"They thought I was too conspicuous on the box to do any good there,"
he explained in a confidential whisper.  "In case there is any firing
now, you ladies want to get down on your knees here at my feet, and
hide your heads in the cushions.  We are entering Los Bocos."

Langham and Clay were riding far in advance, scouting to the right and
left, and the carriage moved noiselessly behind them through the empty
streets.  There was no light in any of the windows, and not even a dog
barked, or a cock crowed.  The women sat erect, listening for the first
signal of an attack, each holding the other's hand and looking at
MacWilliams, who sat with his thumb on the trigger of his carbine,
glancing to the right and left and breathing quickly.  His eyes
twinkled, like those of a little fox terrier.  The men dropped back,
and drew up on a level with the carriage.

"We are all right, so far," Clay whispered.  "The beach slopes down
from the other side of that line of trees.  What is the matter with
you?" he demanded, suddenly, looking up at the driver, "are you afraid?"

"No," the man answered, hurriedly, his voice shaking; "it's the cold."

Langham had galloped on ahead and as he passed through the trees and
came out upon the beach, he saw a broad stretch of moonlit water and
the lights from the yacht shining from a point a quarter of a mile off
shore.  Among the rocks on the edge of the beach was the "Vesta's"
longboat and her crew seated in it or standing about on the beach.  The
carriage had stopped under the protecting shadow of the trees, and he
raced back toward it.

"The yacht is here," he cried.  "The long-boat is waiting and there is
not a sign of light about the Custom-house.  Come on," he cried.  "We
have beaten them after all."

A sailor, who had been acting as lookout on the rocks, sprang to his
full height, and shouted to the group around the long-boat, and King
came up the beach toward them running heavily through the deep sand.

Madame Alvarez stepped down from the carriage, and as Hope handed her
her jewel case in silence, the men draped her cloak about her
shoulders.  She put out her hand to them, and as Clay took it in his,
she bent her head quickly and kissed his hand.  "You were his friend,"
she murmured.

She held Hope in her arms for an instant, and kissed her, and then gave
her hand in turn to Langham and to MacWilliams.

"I do not know whether I shall ever see you again," she said, looking
slowly from one to the other, "but I will pray for you every day, and
God will reward you for saving a worthless life."

As she finished speaking King came up to the group, followed by three
of his men.

"Is Hope with you, is she safe?" he asked.

"Yes, she is with me," Madame Alvarez answered.

"Thank God," King exclaimed, breathlessly.  "Then we will start at
once, Madame.  Where is she?  She must come with us!"

"Of course," Clay-assented, eagerly, "she will be much safer on the
yacht."

But Hope protested.  "I must get back to father," she said. "The yacht
will not arrive until late to-morrow, and the carriage can take me to
him five hours earlier.  The family have worried too long about me as
it is, and, besides, I will not leave Ted.  I am going back as I came."

"It is most unsafe," King urged.

"On the contrary, it is perfectly safe now," Hope answered. "It was not
one of us they wanted."

"You may be right," King said.  "They don't know what has happened to
you, and perhaps after all it would be better if you went back the
quicker way."  He gave his arm to Madame Alvarez and walked with her
toward the shore.  As the men surrounded her on every side and moved
away, Clay glanced back at Hope and saw her standing upright in the
carriage looking after them.

"We will be with you in a minute," he called, as though in apology for
leaving her for even that brief space.  And then the shadow of the
trees shut her and the carriage from his sight. His footsteps made no
sound in the soft sand, and except for the whispering of the palms and
the sleepy wash of the waves as they ran up the pebbly beach and sank
again, the place was as peaceful and silent as a deserted island,
though the moon made it as light as day.

The long-boat had been drawn up with her stern to the shore, and the
men were already in their places, some standing waiting for the order
to shove off, and others seated balancing their oars.

King had arranged to fire a rocket when the launch left the shore, in
order that the captain of the yacht might run in closer to pick them
up.  As he hurried down the beach, he called to his boatswain to give
the signal, and the man answered that he understood and stooped to
light a match.  King had jumped into the stern and lifted Madame
Alvarez after him, leaving her late escort standing with uncovered
heads on the beach behind her, when the rocket shot up into the calm
white air, with a roar and a rush and a sudden flash of color.  At the
same instant, as though in answer to its challenge, the woods back of
them burst into an irregular line of flame, a volley of rifle shots
shattered the silence, and a score of bullets splashed in the water and
on the rocks about them.

The boatswain in the bow of the long-boat tossed up his arms and
pitched forward between the thwarts.

"Give way," he shouted as he fell.

"Pull," Clay yelled, "pull, all of you."

He threw himself against the stern of the boat, and Langham and
MacWilliams clutched its sides, and with their shoulders against it and
their bodies half sunk in the water, shoved it off, free of the shore.

The shots continued fiercely, and two of the crew cried out and fell
back upon the oars of the men behind them.

Madame Alvarez sprang to her feet and stood swaying unsteadily as the
boat leaped forward.

"Take me back.  Stop, I command you," she cried, "I will not leave
those men.  Do you hear?"

King caught her by the waist and dragged her down, but she struggled to
free herself.  "I will not leave them to be murdered," she cried.  "You
cowards, put me back."

"Hold her, King," Clay shouted.  "We're all right.  They're not firing
at us."

His voice was drowned in the noise of the oars beating in the rowlocks,
and the reports of the rifles.  The boat disappeared in a mist of spray
and moonlight, and Clay turned and faced about him.  Langham and
MacWilliams were crouching behind a rock and firing at the flashes in
the woods.

"You can't stay there," Clay cried.  "We must get back to Hope."

He ran forward, dodging from side to side and firing as he ran. He
heard shots from the water, and looking back saw that the men in the
longboat had ceased rowing, and were returning the fire from the shore.

"Come back, Hope is all right," her brother called to him.  "I haven't
seen a shot within a hundred yards of her yet, they're firing from the
Custom-house and below.  I think Mac's hit."

"I'm not," MacWilliams's voice answered from behind a rock, "but I'd
like to see something to shoot at."

A hot tremor of rage swept over Clay at the thought of a possibly fatal
termination to the night's adventure.  He groaned at the mockery of
having found his life only to lose it now, when it was more precious to
him than it had ever been, and to lose it in a silly brawl with
semi-savages.  He cursed himself impotently and rebelliously for a
senseless fool.

"Keep back, can't you?" he heard Langham calling to him from the shore.
"You're only drawing the fire toward Hope.  She's got away by now.  She
had both the horses."

Langham and MacWilliams started forward to Clay's side, but the instant
they left the shadow of the rock, the bullets threw up the sand at
their feet and they stopped irresolutely.  The moon showed the three
men outlined against the white sand of the beach as clearly as though a
searchlight had been turned upon them, even while its shadows sheltered
and protected their assailants. At their backs the open sea cut off
retreat, and the line of fire in front held them in check.  They were
as helpless as chessmen upon a board.

"I'm not going to stand still to be shot at," cried MacWilliams.
"Let's hide or let's run.  This isn't doing anybody any good."  But no
one moved.  They could hear the singing of the bullets as they passed
them whining in the air like a banjo-string that is being tightened,
and they knew they were in equal danger from those who were firing from
the boat.

"They're shooting better," said MacWilliams.  "They'll reach us in a
minute."

"They've reached me already, I think," Langham answered, with
suppressed satisfaction, "in the shoulder.  It's nothing."  His
unconcern was quite sincere; to a young man who had galloped through
two long halves of a football match on a strained tendon, a scratched
shoulder was not important, except as an unsought honor.

But it was of the most importance to MacWilliams.  He raised his voice
against the men in the woods in impotent fury.  "Come out, you cowards,
where we can see you," he cried.  "Come out where I can shoot your
black heads off."

Clay had fired the last cartridge in his rifle, and throwing it away
drew his revolver.

"We must either swim or hide," he said.  "Put your heads down and run."

But as he spoke, they saw the carriage plunging out of the shadow of
the woods and the horses galloping toward them down the beach.
MacWilliams gave a cheer of welcome.  "Hurrah!" he shouted, "it's Jose'
coming for us.  He's a good man.  Well done, Jose'!" he called.

"That's not Jose'," Langham cried, doubtfully, peering through the
moonlight.  "Good God!  It's Hope," he exclaimed. He waved his hands
frantically above his head.  "Go back, Hope," he cried, "go back!"

But the carriage did not swerve on its way toward them.  They all saw
her now distinctly.  She was on the driver's box and alone, leaning
forward and lashing the horses' backs with the whip and reins, and
bending over to avoid the bullets that passed above her head.  As she
came down upon them, she stood up, her woman's figure outlined clearly
in the riding habit she still wore. "Jump in when I turn," she cried.
"I'm going to turn slowly, run and jump in."

She bent forward again and pulled the horses to the right, and as they
obeyed her, plunging and tugging at their bits, as though they knew the
danger they were in, the men threw themselves at the carriage.  Clay
caught the hood at the back, swung himself up, and scrambled over the
cushions and up to the box seat.  He dropped down behind Hope, and
reaching his arms around her took the reins in one hand, and with the
other forced her down to her knees upon the footboard, so that, as she
knelt, his arms and body protected her from the bullets sent after
them.  Langham followed Clay, and tumbled into the carriage over the
hood at the back, but MacWilliams endeavored to vault in from the step,
and missing his footing fell under the hind wheel, so that the weight
of the carriage passed over him, and his head was buried for an instant
in the sand.  But he was on his feet again before they had noticed that
he was down, and as he jumped for the hood, Langham caught him by the
collar of his coat and dragged him into the seat, panting and gasping,
and rubbing the sand from his mouth and nostrils.  Clay turned the
carriage at a right angle through the heavy sand, and still standing
with Hope crouched at his knees, he raced back to the woods into the
face of the firing, with the boys behind him answering it from each
side of the carriage, so that the horses leaped forward in a frenzy of
terror, and dashing through the woods, passed into the first road that
opened before them.

The road into which they had turned was narrow, but level, and ran
through a forest of banana palms that bent and swayed above them.
Langham and MacWilliams still knelt in the rear seat of the carriage,
watching the road on the chance of possible pursuit.

"Give me some cartridges," said Langham.  "My belt is empty. What road
is this?"

"It is a private road, I should say, through somebody's banana
plantation.  But it must cross the main road somewhere.  It doesn't
matter, we're all right now.  I mean to take it easy." MacWilliams
turned on his back and stretched out his legs on the seat opposite.

"Where do you suppose those men sprang from?  Were they following us
all the time?"

"Perhaps, or else that message got over the wire before we cut it, and
they've been lying in wait for us.  They were probably watching King
and his sailors for the last hour or so, but they didn't want him.
They wanted her and the money.  It was pretty exciting, wasn't it?
How's your shoulder?"

"It's a little stiff, thank you," said Langham.  He stood up and by
peering over the hood could just see the top of Clay's sombrero rising
above it where he sat on the back seat.

"You and Hope all right up there, Clay?" he asked.

The top of the sombrero moved slightly, and Langham took it as a sign
that all was well.  He dropped back into his seat beside MacWilliams,
and they both breathed a long sigh of relief and content.  Langham's
wounded arm was the one nearest MacWilliams, and the latter parted the
torn sleeve and examined the furrow across the shoulder with
unconcealed envy.

"I am afraid it won't leave a scar," he said, sympathetically.

"Won't it?" asked Langham, in some concern.

The horses had dropped into a walk, and the beauty of the moonlit night
put its spell upon the two boys, and the rustling of the great leaves
above their heads stilled and quieted them so that they unconsciously
spoke in whispers.

Clay had not moved since the horses turned of their own accord into the
valley of the palms.  He no longer feared pursuit nor any interruption
to their further progress.  His only sensation was one of utter
thankfulness that they were all well out of it, and that Hope had been
the one who had helped them in their trouble, and his dearest thought
was that, whether she wished or not, he owed his safety, and possibly
his life, to her.

She still crouched between his knees upon the broad footboard, with her
hands clasped in front of her, and looking ahead into the vista of soft
mysterious lights and dark shadows that the moon cast upon the road.
Neither of them spoke, and as the silence continued unbroken, it took a
weightier significance, and at each added second of time became more
full of meaning.

The horses had dropped into a tired walk, and drew them smoothly over
the white road; from behind the hood came broken snatches of the boys'
talk, and above their heads the heavy leaves of the palms bent and
bowed as though in benediction.  A warm breeze from the land filled the
air with the odor of ripening fruit and pungent smells, and the silence
seemed to envelop them and mark them as the only living creatures awake
in the brilliant tropical night.

Hope sank slowly back, and as she did so, her shoulder touched for an
instant against Clay's knee; she straightened herself and made a
movement as though to rise.  Her nearness to him and something in her
attitude at his feet held Clay in a spell.  He bent forward and laid
his hand fearfully upon her shoulder, and the touch seemed to stop the
blood in his veins and hushed the words upon his lips.  Hope raised her
head slowly as though with a great effort, and looked into his eyes.
It seemed to him that he had been looking into those same eyes for
centuries, as though he had always known them, and the soul that looked
out of them into his.  He bent his head lower, and stretching out his
arms drew her to him, and the eyes did not waver.  He raised her and
held her close against his breast.  Her eyes faltered and closed.

"Hope," he whispered, "Hope."  He stooped lower and kissed her, and his
lips told her what they could not speak--and they were quite alone.



XIV

An hour later Langham rose with a protesting sigh and shook the hood
violently.

"I say!" he called.  "Are you asleep up there.  We'll never get home at
this rate.  Doesn't Hope want to come back here and go to sleep?"

The carriage stopped, and the boys tumbled out and walked around in
front of it.  Hope sat smiling on the box-seat.  She was apparently far
from sleepy, and she was quite contented where she was, she told him.

"Do you know we haven't had anything to eat since yesterday at
breakfast?" asked Langham.  "MacWilliams and I are fainting. We move
that we stop at the next shack we come to, and waken the people up and
make them give us some supper."

Hope looked aside at Clay and laughed softly.  "Supper?" she said.
"They want supper!"

Their suffering did not seem to impress Clay deeply.  He sat snapping
his whip at the palm-trees above him, and smiled happily in an
inconsequent and irritating manner at nothing.

"See here!  Do you know that we are lost?" demanded Langham,
indignantly, "and starving?  Have you any idea at all where you are?"

"I have not," said Clay, cheerfully.  "All I know is that a long time
ago there was a revolution and a woman with jewels, who escaped in an
open boat, and I recollect playing that I was a target and standing up
to be shot at in a bright light.  After that I woke up to the really
important things of life--among which supper is not one."

Langham and MacWilliams looked at each other doubtfully, and Langham
shook his head.

"Get down off that box," he commanded.  "If you and Hope think this is
merely a pleasant moonlight drive, we don't.  You two can sit in the
carriage now, and we'll take a turn at driving, and we'll guarantee to
get you to some place soon."

Clay and Hope descended meekly and seated themselves under the hood,
where they could look out upon the moonlit road as it unrolled behind
them.  But they were no longer to enjoy their former leisurely
progress.  The new whip lashed his horses into a gallop, and the trees
flew past them on either hand.

"Do you remember that chap in the 'Last Ride Together'?" said Clay.

    "I and my mistress, side by side,
        Shall be together--forever ride,
      And so one more day am I deified.
        Who knows--the world may end to-night."

Hope laughed triumphantly, and threw out her arms as though she would
embrace the whole beautiful world that stretched around them.

"Oh, no," she laughed.  "To-night the world has just begun."

The carriage stopped, and there was a confusion of voices on the
box-seat, and then a great barking of dogs, and they beheld MacWilliams
beating and kicking at the door of a hut.  The door opened for an inch,
and there was a long debate in Spanish, and finally the door was closed
again, and a light appeared through the windows.  A few minutes later a
man and woman came out of the hut, shivering and yawning, and made a
fire in the sun-baked oven at the side of the house.  Hope and Clay
remained seated in the carriage, and watched the flames springing up
from the oily fagots, and the boys moving about with flaring torches of
pine, pulling down bundles of fodder for the horses from the roof of
the kitchen, while two sleepy girls disappeared toward a mountain
stream, one carrying a jar on her shoulder, and the other lighting the
way with a torch.  Hope sat with her chin on her hand, watching the
black figures passing between them and the fire, and standing above it
with its light on their faces, shading their eyes from the heat with
one hand, and stirring something in a smoking caldron with the other.
Hope felt an overflowing sense of gratitude to these simple strangers
for the trouble they were taking.  She felt how good every one was, and
how wonderfully kind and generous was the world that she lived in.

Her brother came over to the carriage and bowed with mock courtesy.

"I trust, now that we have done all the work," he said, "that your
excellencies will condescend to share our frugal fare, or must we bring
it to you here?"

The clay oven stood in the middle of a hut of laced twigs, through
which the smoke drifted freely.  There was a row of wooden benches
around it, and they all seated themselves and ate ravenously of rice
and fried plantains, while the woman patted and tossed tortillas
between her hands, eyeing her guests curiously.  Her glance fell upon
Langham's shoulder, and rested there for so long that Hope followed the
direction of her eyes. She leaped to her feet with a cry of fear and
reproach, and ran toward her brother.

"Ted!" she cried, "you are hurt! you are wounded, and you never told
me!  What is it?  Is it very bad?" Clay crossed the floor in a stride,
his face full of concern.

"Leave me alone!" cried the stern brother, backing away and warding
them off with the coffeepot.  "It's only scratched. You'll spill the
coffee."

But at the sight of the blood Hope had turned very white, and throwing
her arms around her brother's neck, hid her eyes on his other shoulder
and began to cry.

"I am so selfish," she sobbed.  "I have been so happy and you were
suffering all the time."

Her brother stared at the others in dismay.  "What nonsense," he said,
patting her on the shoulder.  "You're a bit tired, and you need rest.
That's what you need.  The idea of my sister going off in hysterics
after behaving like such a sport--and before these young ladies, too.
Aren't you ashamed?"

"I should think they'd be ashamed," said MacWilliams, severely, as he
continued placidly with his supper.  "They haven't got enough clothes
on."

Langham looked over Hope's shoulder at Clay and nodded significantly.
"She's been on a good deal of a strain," he explained apologetically,
"and no wonder; it's been rather an unusual night for her."

Hope raised her head and smiled at him through her tears.  Then she
turned and moved toward Clay.  She brushed her eyes with the back of
her hand and laughed.  "It has been an unusual night," she said.
"Shall I tell him?" she asked.

Clay straightened himself unconsciously, and stepped beside her and
took her hand; MacWilliams quickly lowered to the bench the dish from
which he was eating, and stood up, too.  The people of the house stared
at the group in the firelight with puzzled interest, at the beautiful
young girl, and at the tall, sunburned young man at her side.  Langham
looked from his sister to Clay and back again, and laughed uneasily.

"Langham, I have been very bold," said Clay.  "I have asked your sister
to marry me--and she has said that she would."

Langham flushed as red as his sister.  He felt himself at a
disadvantage in the presence of a love as great and strong as he knew
this must be.  It made him seem strangely young and inadequate.  He
crossed over to his sister awkwardly and kissed her, and then took
Clay's hand, and the three stood together and looked at one another,
and there was no sign of doubt or question in the face of any one of
them.  They stood so for some little time, smiling and exclaiming
together, and utterly unconscious of anything but their own delight and
happiness.  MacWilliams watched them, his face puckered into odd
wrinkles and his eyes half-closed.  Hope suddenly broke away from the
others and turned toward him with her hands held out.

"Have you nothing to say to me, Mr. MacWilliams?" she asked.

MacWilliams looked doubtfully at Clay, as though from force of habit he
must ask advice from his chief first, and then took the hands that she
held out to him and shook them up and down.  His usual confidence
seemed to have forsaken him, and he stood, shifting from one foot to
the other, smiling and abashed.

"Well, I always said they didn't make them any better than you," he
gasped at last.  "I was always telling him that, wasn't I?"  He nodded
energetically at Clay.  "And that's so; they don't make 'em any better
than you."

He dropped her hands and crossed over to Clay, and stood surveying him
with a smile of wonder and admiration.

"How'd you do it?" he demanded.  "How did you do it?  I suppose you
know," he asked sternly, "that you're not good enough for Miss Hope?
You know that, don't you?"

"Of course I know that," said Clay.

MacWilliams walked toward the door and stood in it for a second,
looking back at them over his shoulder.  "They don't make them any
better than that," he reiterated gravely, and disappeared in the
direction of the horses, shaking his head and muttering his
astonishment and delight.

"Please give me some money," Hope said to Clay.  "All the money you
have," she added, smiling at her presumption of authority over him,
"and you, too, Ted."  The men emptied their pockets, and Hope poured
the mass of silver into the hands of the women, who gazed at it
uncomprehendingly.

"Thank you for your trouble and your good supper," Hope said in
Spanish, "and may no evil come to your house."

The woman and her daughters followed her to the carriage, bowing and
uttering good wishes in the extravagant metaphor of their country; and
as they drove away, Hope waved her hand to them as she sank closer
against Clay's shoulder.

"The world is full of such kind and gentle souls," she said.

In an hour they had regained the main road, and a little later the
stars grew dim and the moonlight faded, and trees and bushes and rocks
began to take substance and to grow into form and outline.  They saw by
the cool, gray light of the morning the familiar hills around the
capital, and at a cry from the boys on the box-seat, they looked ahead
and beheld the harbor of Valencia at their feet, lying as placid and
undisturbed as the water in a bath-tub.  As they turned up the hill
into the road that led to the Palms, they saw the sleeping capital like
a city of the dead below them, its white buildings reddened with the
light of the rising sun.  From three places in different parts of the
city, thick columns of smoke rose lazily to the sky.

"I had forgotten!" said Clay; "they have been having a revolution here.
It seems so long ago."

By five o'clock they had reached the gate of the Palms, and their
appearance startled the sentry on post into a state of undisciplined
joy.  A riderless pony, the one upon which Jose' had made his escape
when the firing began, had crept into the stable an hour previous,
stiff and bruised and weary, and had led the people at the Palms to
fear the worst.

Mr. Langham and his daughter were standing on the veranda as the horses
came galloping up the avenue.  They had been awake all the night, and
the face of each was white and drawn with anxiety and loss of sleep.
Mr. Langham caught Hope in his arms and held her face close to his in
silence.

"Where have you been?" he said at last.  "Why did you treat me like
this?  You knew how I would suffer."

"I could not help it," Hope cried.  "I had to go with Madame Alvarez."

Her sister had suffered as acutely as had Mr. Langham himself, as long
as she was in ignorance of Hope's whereabouts.  But now that she saw
Hope in the flesh again, she felt a reaction against her for the
anxiety and distress she had caused them.

"My dear Hope," she said, "is every one to be sacrificed for Madame
Alvarez?  What possible use could you be to her at such a time?  It was
not the time nor the place for a young girl.  You were only another
responsibility for the men."

"Clay seemed willing to accept the responsibility," said Langham,
without a smile.  "And, besides," he added, "if Hope had not been with
us we might never have reached home alive."

But it was only after much earnest protest and many explanations that
Mr. Langham was pacified, and felt assured that his son's wound was not
dangerous, and that his daughter was quite safe.

Miss Langham and himself, he said, had passed a trying night. There had
been much firing in the city, and continual uproar. The houses of
several of the friends of Alvarez had been burned and sacked.  Alvarez
himself had been shot as soon as he had entered the yard of the
military prison.  It was then given out that he had committed suicide.
Mendoza had not dared to kill Rojas, because of the feeling of the
people toward him, and had even shown him to the mob from behind the
bars of one of the windows in order to satisfy them that he was still
living.  The British Minister had sent to the Palace for the body of
Captain Stuart, and had had it escorted to the Legation, from whence it
would be sent to England.  This, as far as Mr. Langham had heard, was
the news of the night just over.

"Two native officers called here for you about midnight, Clay," he
continued, "and they are still waiting for you below at your office.
They came from Rojas's troops, who are encamped on the hills at the
other side of the city.  They wanted you to join them with the men from
the mines.  I told them I did not know when you would return, and they
said they would wait.  If you could have been here last night, it is
possible that we might have done something, but now that it is all
over, I am glad that you saved that woman instead.  I should have
liked, though, to have struck one blow at them.  But we cannot hope to
win against assassins.  The death of young Stuart has hurt me terribly,
and the murder of Alvarez, coming on top of it, has made me wish I had
never heard of nor seen Olancho.  I have decided to go away at once, on
the next steamer, and I will take my daughters with me, and Ted, too.
The State Department at Washington can fight with Mendoza for the
mines.  You made a good stand, but they made a better one, and they
have beaten us.  Mendoza's coup d'etat has passed into history, and the
revolution is at an end."

On his arrival Clay had at once asked for a cigar, and while Mr.
Langham was speaking he had been biting it between his teeth, with the
serious satisfaction of a man who had been twelve hours without one.
He knocked the ashes from it and considered the burning end
thoughtfully.  Then he glanced at Hope as she stood among the group on
the veranda.  She was waiting for his reply and watching him intently.
He seemed to be confident that she would approve of the only course he
saw open to him.

"The revolution is not at an end by any means, Mr. Langham," he said at
last, simply.  "It has just begun."  He turned abruptly and walked away
in the direction of the office, and MacWilliams and Langham stepped off
the veranda and followed him as a matter of course.

The soldiers in the army who were known to be faithful to General Rojas
belonged to the Third and Fourth regiments, and numbered four thousand
on paper, and two thousand by count of heads. When they had seen their
leader taken prisoner, and swept off the parade-ground by Mendoza's
cavalry, they had first attempted to follow in pursuit and recapture
him, but the men on horseback had at once shaken off the men on foot
and left them, panting and breathless, in the dust behind them.  So
they halted uncertainly in the road, and their young officers held
counsel together. They first considered the advisability of attacking
the military prison, but decided against doing so, as it would lead,
they feared, whether it proved successful or not, to the murder of
Rojas.  It was impossible to return to the city where Mendoza's First
and Second regiments greatly outnumbered them.  Having no leader and no
headquarters, the officers marched the men to the hills above the city
and went into camp to await further developments.

Throughout the night they watched the illumination of the city and of
the boats in the harbor below them; they saw the flames bursting from
the homes of the members of Alvarez's Cabinet, and when the morning
broke they beheld the grounds of the Palace swarming with Mendoza's
troops, and the red and white barred flag of the revolution floating
over it.  The news of the assassination of Alvarez and the fact that
Rojas had been spared for fear of the people, had been carried to them
early in the evening, and with this knowledge of their General's safety
hope returned and fresh plans were discussed.  By midnight they had
definitely decided that should Mendoza attempt to dislodge them the
next morning, they would make a stand, but that if the fight went
against them, they would fall back along the mountain roads to the
Valencia mines, where they hoped to persuade the fifteen hundred
soldiers there installed to join forces with them against the new
Dictator.

In order to assure themselves of this help, a messenger was despatched
by a circuitous route to the Palms, to ask the aid of the resident
director, and another was sent to the mines to work upon the feelings
of the soldiers themselves.  The officer who had been sent to the Palms
to petition Clay for the loan of his soldier-workmen, had decided to
remain until Clay returned, and another messenger had been sent after
him from the camp on the same errand.

These two lieutenants greeted Clay with enthusiasm, but he at once
interrupted them, and began plying them with questions as to where
their camp was situated and what roads led from it to the Palms.

"Bring your men at once to this end of our railroad," he said.  "It is
still early, and the revolutionists will sleep late.  They are drugged
with liquor and worn out with excitement, and whatever may have been
their intentions toward you last night, they will be late in putting
them into practice this morning.  I will telegraph Kirkland to come up
at once with all of his soldiers and with his three hundred Irishmen.
Allowing him a half-hour to collect them and to get his flat cars
together, and another half-hour in which to make the run, he should be
here by half-past six--and that's quick mobilization. You ride back now
and march your men here at a double-quick. With your two thousand we
shall have in all three thousand and eight hundred men.  I must have
absolute control over my own troops.  Otherwise I shall act
independently of you and go into the city alone with my workmen."

"That is unnecessary," said one of the lieutenants.  "We have no
officers.  If you do not command us, there is no one else to do it.  We
promise that our men will follow you and give you every obedience.
They have been led by foreigners before, by young Captain Stuart and
Major Fergurson and Colonel Shrevington. They know how highly General
Rojas thinks of you, and they know that you have led Continental armies
in Europe."

"Well, don't tell them I haven't until this is over," said Clay.  "Now,
ride hard, gentlemen, and bring your men here as quickly as possible."

The lieutenants thanked him effusively and galloped away, radiant at
the success of their mission, and Clay entered the office where
MacWilliams was telegraphing his orders to Kirkland.  He seated himself
beside the instrument, and from time to time answered the questions
Kirkland sent back to him over the wire, and in the intervals of
silence thought of Hope.  It was the first time he had gone into action
feeling the touch of a woman's hand upon his sleeve, and he was fearful
lest she might think he had considered her too lightly.

He took a piece of paper from the table and wrote a few lines upon it,
and then rewrote them several times.  The message he finally sent to
her was this:  "I am sure you understand, and that you would not have
me give up beaten now, when what we do to-day may set us right again.
I know better than any one else in the world can know, what I run the
risk of losing, but you would not have that fear stop me from going on
with what we have been struggling for so long.  I cannot come back to
see you before we start, but I know your heart is with me.  With great
love, Robert Clay."

He gave the note to his servant, and the answer was brought to him
almost immediately.  Hope had not rewritten her message: "I love you
because you are the sort of man you are, and had you given up as father
wished you to do, or on my account, you would have been some one else,
and I would have had to begin over again to learn to love you for some
different reasons.  I know that you will come back to me bringing your
sheaves with you.  Nothing can happen to you now.  Hope."

He had never received a line from her before, and he read and reread
this with a sense of such pride and happiness in his face that
MacWilliams smiled covertly and bent his eyes upon his instrument.
Clay went back into his room and kissed the page of paper gently,
flushing like a boy as he did so, and then folding it carefully, he put
it away beneath his jacket.  He glanced about him guiltily, although he
was quite alone, and taking out his watch, pried it open and looked
down into the face of the photograph that had smiled up at him from it
for so many years. He thought how unlike it was to Alice Langham as he
knew her.  He judged that it must have been taken when she was very
young, at the age Hope was then, before the little world she lived in
had crippled and narrowed her and marked her for its own.  He
remembered what she had said to him the first night he had seen her.
"That is the picture of the girl who ceased to exist four years ago,
and whom you have never met."  He wondered if she had ever existed.

"It looks more like Hope than her sister," he mused.  "It looks very
much like Hope."  He decided that he would let it remain where it was
until Hope gave him a better one; and smiling slightly he snapped the
lid fast, as though he were closing a door on the face of Alice Langham
and locking it forever.

Kirkland was in the cab of the locomotive that brought the soldiers
from the mine.  He stopped the first car in front of the freight
station until the workmen had filed out and formed into a double line
on the platform.  Then he moved the train forward the length of that
car, and those in the one following were mustered out in a similar
manner.  As the cars continued to come in, the men at the head of the
double line passed on through the freight station and on up the road to
the city in an unbroken column. There was no confusion, no crowding,
and no haste.

When the last car had been emptied, Clay rode down the line and
appointed a foreman to take charge of each company, stationing his
engineers and the Irish-Americans in the van.  It looked more like a
mob than a regiment.  None of the men were in uniform, and the native
soldiers were barefoot.  But they showed a winning spirit, and stood in
as orderly an array as though they were drawn up in line to receive
their month's wages.  The Americans in front of the column were
humorously disposed, and inclined to consider the whole affair as a
pleasant outing.  They had been placed in front, not because they were
better shots than the natives, but because every South American thinks
that every citizen of the United States is a master either of the rifle
or the revolver, and Clay was counting on this superstition.  His
assistant engineers and foremen hailed him as he rode on up and down
the line with good-natured cheers, and asked him when they were to get
their commissions, and if it were true that they were all captains, or
only colonels, as they were at home.

They had been waiting for a half-hour, when there was the sound of
horses' hoofs on the road, and the even beat of men's feet, and the
advance guard of the Third and Fourth regiments came toward them at a
quickstep.  The men were still in the full-dress uniforms they had worn
at the review the day before, and in comparison with the
soldier-workmen and the Americans in flannel shirts, they presented so
martial a showing that they were welcomed with tumultuous cheers.  Clay
threw them into a double line on one side of the road, down the length
of which his own marched until they had reached the end of it nearest
to the city, when they took up their position in a close formation, and
the native regiments fell in behind them.  Clay selected twenty of the
best shots from among the engineers and sent them on ahead as a
skirmish line.  They were ordered to fall back at once if they saw any
sign of the enemy.  In this order the column of four thousand men
started for the city.

It was a little after seven when they advanced, and the air was mild
and peaceful.  Men and women came crowding to the doors and windows of
the huts as they passed, and stood watching them in silence, not
knowing to which party the small army might belong. In order to
enlighten them, Clay shouted, "Viva Rojas."  And his men took it up,
and the people answered gladly.

They had reached the closely built portion of the city when the
skirmish line came running back to say that it had been met by a
detachment of Mendoza's cavalry, who had galloped away as soon as they
saw them.  There was then no longer any doubt that the fact of their
coming was known at the Palace, and Clay halted his men in a bare plaza
and divided them into three columns.  Three streets ran parallel with
one another from this plaza to the heart of the city, and opened
directly upon the garden of the Palace where Mendoza had fortified
himself.  Clay directed the columns to advance up these streets,
keeping the head of each column in touch with the other two.  At the
word they were to pour down the side streets and rally to each other's
assistance.

As they stood, drawn up on the three sides of the plaza, he rode out
before them and held up his hat for silence.  They were there with arms
in their hands, he said, for two reasons: the greater one, and the one
which he knew actuated the native soldiers, was their desire to
preserve the Constitution of the Republic. According to their own laws,
the Vice-President must succeed when the President's term of office had
expired, or in the event of his death.  President Alvarez had been
assassinated, and the Vice-President, General Rojas, was, in
consequence, his legal successor.  It was their duty, as soldiers of
the Republic, to rescue him from prison, to drive the man who had
usurped his place into exile, and by so doing uphold the laws which
they had themselves laid down.  The second motive, he went on, was a
less worthy and more selfish one.  The Olancho mines, which now gave
work to thousands and brought millions of dollars into the country,
were coveted by Mendoza, who would, if he could, convert them into a
monopoly of his government.  If he remained in power all foreigners
would be driven out of the country, and the soldiers would be forced to
work in the mines without payment. Their condition would be little
better than that of the slaves in the salt mines of Siberia.  Not only
would they no longer be paid for their labor, but the people as a whole
would cease to receive that share of the earnings of the mines which
had hitherto been theirs.

"Under President Rojas you will have liberty, justice, and prosperity,"
Clay cried.  "Under Mendoza you will be ruled by martial law.  He will
rob and overtax you, and you will live through a reign of terror.
Between them--which will you choose?"

The native soldiers answered by cries of "Rojas," and breaking ranks
rushed across the plaza toward him, crowding around his horse and
shouting, "Long live Rojas," "Long live the Constitution," "Death to
Mendoza."  The Americans stood as they were and gave three cheers for
the Government.

They were still cheering and shouting as they advanced upon the Palace,
and the noise of their coming drove the people indoors, so that they
marched through deserted streets and between closed doors and sightless
windows.  No one opposed them, and no one encouraged them.  But they
could now see the facade of the Palace and the flag of the
Revolutionists hanging from the mast in front of it.

Three blocks distant from the Palace they came upon the buildings of
the United States and English Legations, where the flags of the two
countries had been hung out over the narrow thoroughfare.

The windows and the roofs of each legation were crowded with women and
children who had sought refuge there, and the column halted as Weimer,
the Consul, and Sir Julian Pindar, the English Minister, came out,
bare-headed, into the street and beckoned to Clay to stop.

"As our Minister was not here," Weimer said, "I telegraphed to Truxillo
for the man-of-war there.  She started some time ago, and we have just
heard that she is entering the lower harbor. She should have her
blue-jackets on shore in twenty minutes.  Sir Julian and I think you
ought to wait for them."

The English Minister put a detaining hand on Clay's bridle.  "If you
attack Mendoza at the Palace with this mob," he remonstrated, "rioting
and lawlessness generally will break out all over the city.  I ask you
to keep them back until we get your sailors to police the streets and
protect property."

Clay glanced over his shoulder at the engineers and the Irish workmen
standing in solemn array behind him.  "Oh, you can hardly call this a
mob," he said.  "They look a little rough and ready, but I will answer
for them.  The two other columns that are coming up the streets
parallel to this are Government troops and properly engaged in driving
a usurper out of the Government building.  The best thing you can do is
to get down to the wharf and send the marines and blue-jackets where
you think they will do the most good.  I can't wait for them.  And they
can't come too soon."

The grounds of the Palace occupied two entire blocks; the Botanical
Gardens were in the rear, and in front a series of low terraces ran
down from its veranda to the high iron fence which separated the
grounds from the chief thoroughfare of the city.

Clay sent word to the left and right wing of his little army to make a
detour one street distant from the Palace grounds and form in the
street in the rear of the Botanical Gardens.  When they heard the
firing of his men from the front they were to force their way through
the gates at the back and attack the Palace in the rear.

"Mendoza has the place completely barricaded," Weimer warned him, "and
he has three field pieces covering each of these streets.  You and your
men are directly in line of one of them now.  He is only waiting for
you to get a little nearer before he lets loose."

From where he sat Clay could count the bars of the iron fence in front
of the grounds.  But the boards that backed them prevented his forming
any idea of the strength or the distribution of Mendoza's forces.  He
drew his staff of amateur officers to one side and explained the
situation to them.

"The Theatre National and the Club Union," he said, "face the Palace
from the opposite corners of this street.  You must get into them and
barricade the windows and throw up some sort of shelter for yourselves
along the edge of the roofs and drive the men behind that fence back to
the Palace.  Clear them away from the cannon first, and keep them away
from it.  I will be waiting in the street below.  When you have driven
them back, we will charge the gates and have it out with them in the
gardens.  The Third and Fourth regiments ought to take them in the rear
about the same time.  You will continue to pick them off from the roof."

The two supporting columns had already started on their roundabout way
to the rear of the Palace.  Clay gathered up his reins, and telling his
men to keep close to the walls, started forward, his soldiers following
on the sidewalks and leaving the middle of the street clear.  As they
reached a point a hundred yards below the Palace, a part of the wooden
shield behind the fence was thrown down, there was a puff of white
smoke and a report, and a cannon-ball struck the roof of a house which
they were passing and sent the tiles clattering about their heads.  But
the men in the lead had already reached the stage-door of the theatre
and were opposite one of the doors to the club.  They drove these in
with the butts of their rifles, and raced up the stairs of each of the
deserted buildings until they reached the roof.  Langham was swept by a
weight of men across a stage, and jumped among the music racks in the
orchestra.  He caught a glimpse of the early morning sun shining on the
tawdry hangings of the boxes and the exaggerated perspective of the
scenery.  He ran through corridors between two great statues of Comedy
and Tragedy, and up a marble stair case to a lobby in which he saw the
white faces about him multiplied in long mirrors, and so out to an iron
balcony from which he looked down, panting and breathless, upon the
Palace Gardens, swarming with soldiers and white with smoke.  Men
poured through the windows of the club opposite, dragging sofas and
chairs out to the balcony and upon the flat roof.  The men near him
were tearing down the yellow silk curtains in the lobby and draping
them along the railing of the balcony to better conceal their movements
from the enemy below.  Bullets spattered the stucco about their heads,
and panes of glass broke suddenly and fell in glittering particles upon
their shoulders.  The firing had already begun from the roofs near
them.  Beyond the club and the theatre and far along the street on each
side of the Palace the merchants were slamming the iron shutters of
their shops, and men and women were running for refuge up the high
steps of the church of Santa Maria. Others were gathered in black
masses on the balconies and roofs of the more distant houses, where
they stood outlined against the soft blue sky in gigantic silhouette.
Their shouts of encouragement and anger carried clearly in the morning
air, and spurred on the gladiators below to greater effort.  In the
Palace Gardens a line of Mendoza's men fought from behind the first
barricade, while others dragged tables and bedding and chairs across
the green terraces and tumbled them down to those below, who seized
them and formed them into a second line of defence.

Two of the assistant engineers were kneeling at Langham's feet with the
barrels of their rifles resting on the railing of the balcony.  Their
eyes had been trained for years to judge distances and to measure
space, and they glanced along the sights of their rifles as though they
were looking through the lens of a transit, and at each report their
faces grew more earnest and their lips pressed tighter together.  One
of them lowered his gun to light a cigarette, and Langham handed him
his match-box, with a certain feeling of repugnance.

"Better get under cover, Mr. Langham," the man said, kindly. "There's
no use our keeping your mines for you if you're not alive to enjoy
them.  Take a shot at that crew around the gun."

"I don't like this long range business," Langham answered.  "I am going
down to join Clay.  I don't like the idea of hitting a man when he
isn't looking at you."

The engineer gave an incredulous laugh.

"If he isn't looking at you, he's aiming at the man next to you. 'Live
and let Live' doesn't apply at present."

As Langham reached Clay's side triumphant shouts arose from the
roof-tops, and the men posted there stood up and showed themselves
above the barricades and called to Clay that the cannon were deserted.

Kirkland had come prepared for the barricade, and, running across the
street, fastened a dynamite cartridge to each gate post and lit the
fuses.  The soldiers scattered before him as he came leaping back, and
in an instant later there was a racking roar, and the gates were
pitched out of their sockets and thrown forward, and those in the
street swept across them and surrounded the cannon.

Langham caught it by the throat as though it were human, and did not
feel the hot metal burning the palms of his hands as he choked it and
pointed its muzzle toward the Palace, while the others dragged at the
spokes of the wheel.  It was fighting at close range now, close enough
to suit even Langham.  He found himself in the front rank of it without
knowing exactly how he got there.  Every man on both sides was playing
his own hand, and seemed to know exactly what to do.  He felt neglected
and very much alone, and was somewhat anxious lest his valor might be
wasted through his not knowing how to put it to account.  He saw the
enemy in changing groups of scowling men, who seemed to eye him for an
instant down the length of a gun-barrel and then disappear behind a
puff of smoke.  He kept thinking that war made men take strange
liberties with their fellow-men, and it struck him as being most absurd
that strangers should stand up and try to kill one another, men who had
so little in common that they did not even know one another's names.
The soldiers who were fighting on his own side were equally unknown to
him, and he looked in vain for Clay.  He saw MacWilliams for a moment
through the smoke, jabbing at a jammed cartridge with his pen-knife,
and hacking the lead away to make it slip.  He was remonstrating with
the gun and swearing at it exactly as though it were human, and as
Langham ran toward him he threw it away and caught up another from the
ground.  Kneeling beside the wounded man who had dropped it and picking
the cartridges from his belt, he assured him cheerfully that he was not
so badly hurt as he thought.

"You all right?" Langham asked.

"I'm all right.  I'm trying to get a little laddie hiding behind that
blue silk sofa over there.  He's taken an unnatural dislike to me, and
he's nearly got me three times.  I'm knocking horse-hair out of his
rampart, though."

The men of Stuart's body-guard were fighting outside of the breastworks
and mattresses.  They were using their swords as though they were
machetes, and the Irishmen were swinging their guns around their
shoulders like sledge-hammers, and beating their foes over the head and
breast.  The guns at his own side sounded close at Langham's ear, and
deafened him, and those of the enemy exploded so near to his face that
he was kept continually winking and dodging, as though he were being
taken by a flashlight photograph.  When he fired he aimed where the
mass was thickest, so that he might not see what his bullet did, but he
remembered afterward that he always reloaded with the most anxious
swiftness in order that he might not be killed before he had had
another shot, and that the idea of being killed was of no concern to
him except on that account.  Then the scene before him changed, and
apparently hundreds of Mendoza's soldiers poured out from the Palace
and swept down upon him, cheering as they came, and he felt himself
falling back naturally and as a matter of course, as he would have
stepped out of the way of a locomotive, or a runaway horse, or any
other unreasoning thing.  His shoulders pushed against a mass of
shouting, sweating men, who in turn pressed back upon others, until the
mass reached the iron fence and could move no farther.  He heard Clay's
voice shouting to them, and saw him run forward, shooting rapidly as he
ran, and he followed him, even though his reason told him it was a
useless thing to do, and then there came a great shout from the rear of
the Palace, and more soldiers, dressed exactly like the others, rushed
through the great doors and swarmed around the two wings of the
building, and he recognized them as Rojas's men and knew that the fight
was over.

He saw a tall man with a negro's face spring out of the first mass of
soldiers and shout to them to follow him.  Clay gave a yell of welcome
and ran at him, calling upon him in Spanish to surrender.  The negro
stopped and stood at bay, glaring at Clay and at the circle of soldiers
closing in around him.  He raised his revolver and pointed it steadily.
It was as though the man knew he had only a moment to live, and meant
to do that one thing well in the short time left him.

Clay sprang to one side and ran toward him, dodging to the right and
left, but Mendoza followed his movements carefully with his revolver.

It lasted but an instant.  Then the Spaniard threw his arm suddenly
across his face, drove the heel of his boot into the turf, and spinning
about on it fell forward.

"If he was shot where his sash crosses his heart, I know the man who
did it," Langham heard a voice say at his elbow, and turning saw
MacWilliams wetting his fingers at his lips and touching them gingerly
to the heated barrel of his Winchester.

The death of Mendoza left his followers without a leader and without a
cause.  They threw their muskets on the ground and held their hands
above their heads, shrieking for mercy.  Clay and his officers answered
them instantly by running from one group to another, knocking up the
barrels of the rifles and calling hoarsely to the men on the roofs to
cease firing, and as they were obeyed the noise of the last few random
shots was drowned in tumultuous cheering and shouts of exultation,
that, starting in the gardens, were caught up by those in the streets
and passed on quickly as a line of flame along the swaying housetops.

The native officers sprang upon Clay and embraced him after their
fashion, hailing him as the Liberator of Olancho, as the Preserver of
the Constitution, and their brother patriot.  Then one of them climbed
to the top of a gilt and marble table and proclaimed him military
President.

"You'll proclaim yourself an idiot, if you don't get down from there,"
Clay said, laughing.  "I thank you for permitting me to serve with you,
gentlemen.  I shall have great pleasure in telling our President how
well you acquitted yourself in this row--battle, I mean.  And now I
would suggest that you store the prisoners' weapons in the Palace and
put a guard over them, and then conduct the men themselves to the
military prison, where you can release General Rojas and escort him
back to the city in a triumphal procession.  You'd like that, wouldn't
you?"

But the natives protested that that honor was for him alone. Clay
declined it, pleading that he must look after his wounded.

"I can hardly believe there are any dead," he said to Kirkland.

"For, if it takes two thousand bullets to kill a man in European
warfare, it must require about two hundred thousand to kill a man in
South America."

He told Kirkland to march his men back to the mines and to see that
there were no stragglers.  "If they want to celebrate, let them
celebrate when they get to the mines, but not here.  They have made a
good record to-day and I won't have it spoiled by rioting.  They shall
have their reward later.  Between Rojas and Mr. Langham they should all
be rich men."

The cheering from the housetops since the firing ceased had changed
suddenly into hand-clappings, and the cries, though still
undistinguishable, were of a different sound.  Clay saw that the
Americans on the balconies of the club and of the theatre had thrown
themselves far over the railings and were all looking in the same
direction and waving their hats and cheering loudly, and he heard above
the shouts of the people the regular tramp of men's feet marching in
step, and the rattle of a machine gun as it bumped and shook over the
rough stones.  He gave a shout of pleasure, and Kirkland and the two
boys ran with him up the slope, crowding each other to get a better
view.  The mob parted at the Palace gates, and they saw two lines of
blue-jackets, spread out like the sticks of a fan, dragging the gun
between them, the middies in their tight-buttoned tunics and gaiters,
and behind them more blue-jackets with bare, bronzed throats, and with
the swagger and roll of the sea in their legs and shoulders.  An
American flag floated above the white helmets of the marines.  Its
presence and the sense of pride which the sight of these men from home
awoke in them made the fight just over seem mean and petty, and they
took off their hats and cheered with the others.

A first lieutenant, who felt his importance and also a sense of
disappointment at having arrived too late to see the fighting, left his
men at the gate of the Palace, and advanced up the terrace, stopping to
ask for information as he came.  Each group to which he addressed
himself pointed to Clay.  The sight of his own flag had reminded Clay
that the banner of Mendoza still hung from the mast beside which he was
standing, and as the officer approached he was busily engaged in
untwisting its halyards and pulling it down.

The lieutenant saluted him doubtfully.

"Can you tell me who is in command here?" he asked.  He spoke somewhat
sharply, for Clay was not a military looking personage, covered as he
was with dust and perspiration, and with his sombrero on the back of
his head.

"Our Consul here told us at the landing-place," continued the
lieutenant in an aggrieved tone, "that a General Mendoza was in power,
and that I had better report to him, and then ten minutes later I hear
that he is dead and that a General Rojas is President, but that a man
named Clay has made himself Dictator. My instructions are to recognize
no belligerents, but to report to the Government party.  Now, who is
the Government party?"

Clay brought the red-barred flag down with a jerk, and ripped it free
from the halyards.  Kirkland and the two boys were watching him with
amused smiles.

"I appreciate your difficulty," he said.  "President Alvarez is dead,
and General Mendoza, who tried to make himself Dictator, is also dead,
and the real President, General Rojas, is still in jail.  So at present
I suppose that I represent the Government party, at least I am the man
named Clay.  It hadn't occurred to me before, but, until Rojas is free,
I guess I am the Dictator of Olancho.  Is Madame Alvarez on board your
ship?"

"Yes, she is with us," the officer replied, in some confusion. "Excuse
me--are you the three gentlemen who took her to the yacht?  I am afraid
I spoke rather hastily just now, but you are not in uniform, and the
Government seems to change so quickly down here that a stranger finds
it hard to keep up with it."

Six of the native officers had approached as the lieutenant was
speaking and saluted Clay gravely.  "We have followed your
instructions," one of them said, "and the regiments are ready to march
with the prisoners.  Have you any further orders for us--can we deliver
any messages to General Rojas?"

"Present my congratulations to General Rojas, and best wishes," said
Clay.  "And tell him for me, that it would please me greatly if he
would liberate an American citizen named Burke, who is at present in
the cuartel.  And that I wish him to promote all of you gentlemen one
grade and give each of you the Star of Olancho.  Tell him that in my
opinion you have deserved even higher reward and honor at his hands."

The boy-lieutenants broke out into a chorus of delighted thanks. They
assured Clay that he was most gracious; that he overwhelmed them, and
that it was honor enough for them that they had served under him.  But
Clay laughed, and drove them off with a paternal wave of the hand.

The officer from the man-of-war listened with an uncomfortable sense of
having blundered in his manner toward this powder-splashed young man
who set American citizens at liberty, and created captains by the
half-dozen at a time.

"Are you from the States?" he asked as they moved toward the
man-of-war's men.

"I am, thank God.  Why not?"

"I thought you were, but you saluted like an Englishman."

"I was an officer in the English army once in the Soudan, when they
were short of officers."  Clay shook his head and looked wistfully at
the ranks of the blue-jackets drawn up on either side of them.  The
horses had been brought out and Langham and MacWilliams were waiting
for him to mount.  "I have worn several uniforms since I was a boy,"
said Clay.  "But never that of my own country."

The people were cheering him from every part of the square. Women waved
their hands from balconies and housetops, and men climbed to awnings
and lampposts and shouted his name.  The officers and men of the
landing party took note of him and of this reception out of the corner
of their eyes, and wondered.

"And what had I better do?" asked the commanding officer.

"Oh, I would police the Palace grounds, if I were you, and picket that
street at the right, where there are so many wine shops, and preserve
order generally until Rojas gets here. He won't be more than an hour,
now.  We shall be coming over to pay our respects to your captain
to-morrow.  Glad to have met you."

"Well, I'm glad to have met you," answered the officer, heartily.
"Hold on a minute.  Even if you haven't worn our uniform, you're as
good, and better, than some I've seen that have, and you're a sort of a
commander-in-chief, anyway, and I'm damned if I don't give you a sort
of salute."

Clay laughed like a boy as he swung himself into the saddle.  The
officer stepped back and gave the command; the middies raised their
swords and Clay passed between massed rows of his countrymen with their
muskets held rigidly toward him.  The housetops rocked again at the
sight, and as he rode out into the brilliant sunshine, his eyes were
wet and winking.

The two boys had drawn up at his side, but MacWilliams had turned in
the saddle and was still looking toward the Palace, with his hand
resting on the hindquarters of his pony.

"Look back, Clay," he said.  "Take a last look at it, you'll never see
it after to-day.  Turn again, turn again, Dictator of Olancho."

The men laughed and drew rein as he bade them, and looked back up the
narrow street.  They saw the green and white flag of Olancho creeping
to the top of the mast before the Palace, the blue-jackets driving back
the crowd, the gashes in the walls of the houses, where Mendoza's
cannonballs had dug their way through the stucco, and the silk
curtains, riddled with bullets, flapping from the balconies of the
opera-house.

"You had it all your own way an hour ago," MacWilliams said, mockingly.
"You could have sent Rojas into exile, and made us all Cabinet
Ministers--and you gave it up for a girl.  Now, you're Dictator of
Olancho.  What will you be to-morrow?  To-morrow you will be Andrew
Langham's son-in-law--Benedict, the married man.  Andrew Langham's
son-in-law cannot ask his wife to live in such a hole as this,
so--Goodbye, Mr. Clay.  We have been long together."

Clay and Langham looked curiously at the boy to see if he were in
earnest, but MacWilliams would not meet their eyes.

"There were three of us," he said, "and one got shot, and one got
married, and the third--?  You will grow fat, Clay, and live on Fifth
Avenue and wear a high silk hat, and some day when you're sitting in
your club you'll read a paragraph in a newspaper with a queer Spanish
date-line to it, and this will all come back to you,--this heat, and
the palms, and the fever, and the days when you lived on plantains and
we watched our trestles grow out across the canons, and you'll be
willing to give your hand to sleep in a hammock again, and to feel the
sweat running down your back, and you'll want to chuck your gun up
against your chin and shoot into a line of men, and the policemen won't
let you, and your wife won't let you.  That's what you're giving up.
There it is.  Take a good look at it.  You'll never see it again."



XV

The steamer "Santiago," carrying "passengers, bullion, and coffee," was
headed to pass Porto Rico by midnight, when she would be free of land
until she anchored at the quarantine station of the green hills of
Staten Island.  She had not yet shaken off the contamination of the
earth; a soft inland breeze still tantalized her with odors of tree and
soil, the smell of the fresh coat of paint that had followed her
coaling rose from her sides, and the odor of spilt coffee-grains that
hung around the hatches had yet to be blown away by a jealous ocean
breeze, or washed by a welcoming cross sea.

The captain stopped at the open entrance of the Social Hall. "If any of
you ladies want to take your last look at Olancho you've got to come
now," he said.  "We'll lose the Valencia light in the next quarter
hour."

Miss Langham and King looked up from their novels and smiled, and Miss
Langham shook her head.  "I've taken three final farewells of Olancho
already," she said: "before we went down to dinner, and when the sun
set, and when the moon rose.  I have no more sentiment left to draw on.
Do you want to go?" she asked.

"I'm very comfortable, thank you," King said, and returned to the
consideration of his novel.

But Clay and Hope arose at the captain's suggestion with suspicious
alacrity, and stepped out upon the empty deck, and into the
encompassing darkness, with a little sigh of relief.

Alice Langham looked after them somewhat wistfully and bit the edges of
her book.  She sat for some time with her brows knitted, glancing
occasionally and critically toward King and up with unseeing eyes at
the swinging lamps of the saloon.  He caught her looking at him once
when he raised his eyes as he turned a page, and smiled back at her,
and she nodded pleasantly and bent her head over her reading.  She
assured herself that after all King understood her and she him, and
that if they never rose to certain heights, they never sank below a
high level of mutual esteem, and that perhaps was the best in the end.

King had placed his yacht at the disposal of Madame Alvarez, and she
had sailed to Colon, where she could change to the steamers for Lisbon,
while he accompanied the Langhams and the wedding party to New York.

Clay recognized that the time had now arrived in his life when he could
graduate from the position of manager-director and become the
engineering expert, and that his services in Olancho were no longer
needed.

With Rojas in power Mr. Langham had nothing further to fear from the
Government, and with Kirkland in charge and young Langham returning
after a few months' absence to resume his work, he felt himself free to
enjoy his holiday.

They had taken the first steamer out, and the combined efforts of all
had been necessary to prevail upon MacWilliams to accompany them; and
even now the fact that he was to act as Clay's best man and, as Langham
assured him cheerfully, was to wear a frock coat and see his name in
all the papers, brought on such sudden panics of fear that the
fast-fading coast line filled his soul with regret, and a wilful desire
to jump overboard and swim back.

Clay and Hope stopped at the door of the chief engineer's cabin and
said they had come to pay him a visit.  The chief had but just come
from the depths where the contamination of the earth was most evident
in the condition of his stokers; but his chin was now cleanly shaven,
and his pipe was drawing as well as his engine fires, and he had
wrapped himself in an old P. & O. white duck jacket to show what he had
been before he sank to the level of a coasting steamer.  They admired
the clerk-like neatness of the report he had just finished, and in
return he promised them the fastest run on record, and showed them the
portrait of his wife, and of their tiny cottage on the Isle of Wight,
and his jade idols from Corea, and carved cocoanut gourds from Brazil,
and a picture from the "Graphic" of Lord Salisbury, tacked to the
partition and looking delightedly down between two highly colored
lithographs of Miss Ellen Terry and the Princess May.

Then they called upon the captain, and Clay asked him why captains
always hung so much lace about their beds when they invariably slept on
a red velvet sofa with their boots on, and the captain ordered his
Chinese steward to mix them a queer drink and offered them the choice
of a six months' accumulation of paper novels, and free admittance to
his bridge at all hours. And then they passed on to the door of the
smoking-room and beckoned MacWilliams to come out and join them.  His
manner as he did so bristled with importance, and he drew them eagerly
to the rail.

"I've just been having a chat with Captain Burke," he said, in an
undertone.  "He's been telling Langham and me about a new game that's
better than running railroads.  He says there's a country called
Macedonia that's got a native prince who wants to be free from Turkey,
and the Turks won't let him, and Burke says if we'll each put up a
thousand dollars, he'll guarantee to get the prince free in six months.
He's made an estimate of the cost and submitted it to the Russian
Embassy at Washington, and he says they will help him secretly, and he
knows a man who has just patented a new rifle, and who will supply him
with a thousand of them for the sake of the advertisement.  He says
it's a mountainous country, and all you have to do is to stand on the
passes and roll rocks down on the Turks as they come in.  It sounds
easy, doesn't it?"

"Then you're thinking of turning professional filibuster yourself?"
said Clay.

"Well, I don't know.  It sounds more interesting than engineering.
Burke says I beat him on his last fight, and he'd like to have me with
him in the next one--sort of young-blood-in-the-firm idea--and he
calculates that we can go about setting people free and upsetting
governments for some time to come.  He says there is always something
to fight about if you look for it. And I must say the condition of
those poor Macedonians does appeal to me.  Think of them all alone down
there bullied by that Sultan of Turkey, and wanting to be free and
independent.  That's not right.  You, as an American citizen, ought to
be the last person in the world to throw cold water on an undertaking
like that.  In the name of Liberty now?"

"I don't object; set them free, of course," laughed Clay. "But how long
have you entertained this feeling for the enslaved Macedonians, Mac?"

"Well, I never heard of them until a quarter of an hour ago, but they
oughtn't to suffer through my ignorance."

"Certainly not.  Let me know when you're going to do it, and Hope and I
will run over and look on.  I should like to see you and Burke and the
Prince of Macedonia rolling rocks down on the Turkish Empire."

Hope and Clay passed on up the deck laughing, and MacWilliams looked
after them with a fond and paternal smile.  The lamp in the wheelhouse
threw a broad belt of light across the forward deck as they passed
through it into the darkness of the bow, where the lonely lookout
turned and stared at them suspiciously, and then resumed his stern
watch over the great waters.

They leaned upon the rail and breathed the soft air which the rush of
the steamer threw in their faces, and studied in silence the stars that
lay so low upon the horizon line that they looked like the harbor
lights of a great city.

"Do you see that long line of lamps off our port bow?" asked Clay.

Hope nodded.

"Those are the electric lights along the ocean drive at Long Branch and
up the Rumson Road, and those two stars a little higher up are fixed to
the mast-heads of the Scotland Lightship. And that mass of light that
you think is the Milky Way, is the glare of the New York street lamps
thrown up against the sky."

"Are we so near as that?" said Hope, smiling.  "And what lies over
there?" she asked, pointing to the east.

"Over there is the coast of Africa.  Don't you see the lighthouse on
Cape Bon?  If it wasn't for Gibraltar being in the way, I could show
you the harbor lights of Bizerta, and the terraces of Algiers shining
like a caf chantant in the night."

"Algiers," sighed Hope, "where you were a soldier of Africa, and rode
across the deserts.  Will you take me there?"

"There, of course, but to Gibraltar first, where we will drive along
the Alameda by moonlight.  I drove there once coming home from a mess
dinner with the Colonel.  The drive lies between broad white
balustrades, and the moon shone down on us between the leaves of the
Spanish bayonet.  It was like an Italian garden.  But he did not see
it, and he would talk to me about the Watkins range finder on the lower
ramparts, and he puffed on a huge cigar.  I tried to imagine I was
there on my honeymoon, but the end of his cigar would light up and I
would see his white mustache and the glow on his red jacket, so I vowed
I would go over that drive again with the proper person.  And we won't
talk of range finders, will we?

"There to the North is Paris; your Paris, and my Paris, with London
only eight hours away.  If you look very closely, you can see the
thousands of hansom cab lamps flashing across the asphalt, and the open
theatres, and the fairy lamps in the gardens back of the houses in
Mayfair, where they are giving dances in your honor, in honor of the
beautiful American bride, whom every one wants to meet.  And you will
wear the finest tiara we can get on Bond Street, but no one will look
at it; they will only look at you.  And I will feel very miserable and
tease you to come home."

Hope put her hand in his, and he held her finger-tips to his lips for
an instant and closed his other hand upon hers.

"And after that?" asked Hope.

"After that we will go to work again, and take long journeys to Mexico
and Peru or wherever they want me, and I will sit in judgment on the
work other chaps have done.  And when we get back to our car at night,
or to the section house, for it will be very rough sometimes,"--Hope
pressed his hand gently in answer,--"I will tell you privately how very
differently your husband would have done it, and you, knowing all about
it, will say that had it been left to me, I would certainly have
accomplished it in a vastly superior manner."

"Well, so you would," said Hope, calmly.

"That's what I said you'd say," laughed Clay.  "Dearest," he begged,
"promise me something.  Promise me that you are going to be very happy."

Hope raised her eyes and looked up at him in silence, and had the man
in the wheelhouse been watching the stars, as he should have been, no
one but the two foolish young people on the bow of the boat would have
known her answer.

The ship's bell sounded eight times, and Hope moved slightly.

"So late as that," she sighed.  "Come.  We must be going back."

A great wave struck the ship's side a friendly slap, and the wind
caught up the spray and tossed it in their eyes, and blew a strand of
her hair loose so that it fell across Clay's face, and they laughed
happily together as she drew it back and he took her hand again to
steady her progress across the slanting deck.

As they passed hand in hand out of the shadow into the light from the
wheelhouse, the lookout in the bow counted the strokes of the bell to
himself, and then turned and shouted back his measured cry to the
bridge above them.  His voice seemed to be a part of the murmuring sea
and the welcoming winds.

"Listen," said Clay.

"Eight bells," the voice sang from the darkness.  "The for'ard light's
shining bright--and all's well."









BY

RICHARD HARDING DAVIS




The King's Jackal


I

The private terrace of the Hotel Grand Bretagne, at Tangier, was shaded
by a great awning of red and green and yellow, and strewn with colored
mats, and plants in pots, and wicker chairs.  It reached out from the
Kings apartments into the Garden of Palms, and was hidden by them on
two sides, and showed from the third the blue waters of the
Mediterranean and the great shadow of Gibraltar in the distance.

The Sultan of Morocco had given orders from Fez that the King of
Messina, in spite of his incognito, should be treated during his stay
in Tangier with the consideration due to his rank, so one-half of the
Hotel Grand Bretagne had been set aside for him and his suite, and two
soldiers of the Bashaw's Guard sat outside of his door with drawn
swords.  They were answerable with their heads for the life and safety
of the Sultan's guest, and as they could speak no language but their
own, they made a visit to his Majesty more a matter of adventure than
of etiquette.

Niccolas, the King's majordomo, stepped out upon the terrace and swept
the Mediterranean with a field-glass for the third time since sunrise.
He lowered it, and turned doubtfully toward the two soldiers.

"The boat from Gibraltar--has she arrived yet?" he asked.

The two ebony figures shook their heads stiffly, as though they
resented this introduction of a foreign language, and continued to
shake their heads as the servant addressed the same question to them in
a succession of strange tongues.

"Well," said Colonel Erhaupt, briskly, as he followed Niccolas out upon
the terrace, "has the boat arrived?  And the launch from the yacht," he
continued, "has it started for shore yet?"

The man pointed to where the yacht lay, a mile outside the harbor, and
handed him the glass.

"It is but just now leaving the ship's side," he said.  "But I cannot
make out who comes in her.  Ah, pardon," he added quickly, as he
pointed to a stout elderly gentleman who walked rapidly toward them
through the garden.  "The Gibraltar boat must be in, sir.  Here is
Baron Barrat coming up the path."

Colonel Erhaupt gave an exclamation of satisfaction, and waved his hand
to the newcomer in welcome.

"Go tell his Majesty," he said to the servant.

The man hesitated and bowed.  "His Majesty still sleeps."

"Wake him," commanded Erhaupt.  "Tell him I said to do so.  Well,
Baron," he cried, gayly, as he stepped forward, "welcome--or are you
welcome?" he added, with an uneasy laugh.

"I should be.  I have succeeded," the other replied gruffly, as he
brushed past him.  "Where is the King?"

"He will be here in a moment.  I have sent to wake him.  And you have
been successful?  Good.  I congratulate you.  How far successful?"

The Baron threw himself into one of the wicker chairs, and clapped his
hands impatiently for a servant.  "Twelve thousand pounds in all," he
replied.  "That's more than he expected.  It was like pulling teeth at
first.  I want some coffee at once," he said to the attendant, "and a
bath.  That boat reeked with Moors and cattle, and there was no
wagon-lit on the train from Madrid.  I sat up all night, and played
cards with that young Cellini.  Have Madame Zara and Kalonay returned?
I see the yacht in the harbor.  Did she succeed?"

"We do not know; the boat only arrived at daybreak.  They are probably
on the launch that is coming in now."

As Barrat sipped his coffee and munched his rolls with the silent
energy of a hungry man, the Colonel turned and strode up and down the
terrace, pulling at his mustache and glancing sideways.  When the Baron
had lighted a cigarette and thrown himself back in his chair, Erhaupt
halted and surveyed him in some anxiety.

"You have been gone over two weeks," he said.  "I should like to see
you accomplish as much in as short a time," growled the other.  "You
know Paris.  You know how hard it is to get people to be serious there.
I had the devil's own time at first.  You got my cablegram?"

"Yes; it wasn't encouraging."

"Well, I wasn't hopeful myself.  They wouldn't believe a word of it at
first.  They said Louis hadn't shown such great love for his country or
his people since his exile that they could feel any confidence in him,
and that his conduct in the last six years did not warrant their
joining any undertaking in which he was concerned.  You can't blame
them.  They've backed him so many times already, and they've been
bitten, and they're shy, naturally.  But I swore he was repentant, that
he saw the error of his ways, that he wanted to sit once more before he
died on the throne of his ancestors, and that he felt it was due to his
son that he should make an effort to get him back his birthright.  It
was the son won them.  `Exhibit A' I call him.  None of them would hear
of it until I spoke of the Prince.  So when I saw that, I told them he
was a fine little chap, healthy and manly and brave, and devoted to his
priest, and all that rot, and they began to listen.  At first they
wanted his Majesty to abdicate, and give the boy a clear road to the
crown, but of course I hushed that up.  I told them we were acting
advisedly, that we had reason to know that the common people of Messina
were sick of the Republic, and wanted their King; that Louis loved the
common people like a father; that he would re-establish the Church in
all her power, and that Father Paul was working day and night for us,
and that the Vatican was behind us.  Then I dealt out decorations and a
few titles, which Louis has made smell so confoundedly rank to Heaven
that nobody would take them.  It was like a game.  I played one noble
gentleman against another, and gave this one a portrait of the King one
day, and the other a miniature of `Exhibit A' the next and they grew
jealous, and met together, and talked it over, and finally unlocked
their pockets.  They contributed about L9,000 between them.  Then the
enthusiasm spread to the women, and they gave me their jewels, and a
lot of youngsters volunteered for the expedition, and six of them came
on with me in the train last night.  I won two thousand francs from
that boy Cellini on the way down.  They're all staying at the
Continental.  I promised them an audience this morning."

"Good," commented the Colonel, "good--L9,000.  I suppose you took out
your commission in advance?"

"I took out nothing," returned the other, angrily.  "I brought it all
with me, and I have a letter from each of them stating just what he or
she subscribed toward the expedition,--the Duke Dantiz, so much; the
Duke D'Orvay, 50,000 francs; the Countess Mattini, a diamond necklace.
It is all quite regular.  I played fair."  The Colonel had stopped in
his walk, and had been peering eagerly down the leafy path through the
garden.  "Is that not Zara coming now?" he asked.  "Look, your eyes are
better than mine."

Barrat rose  quickly, and the two men walked forward, and bowed with
the easy courtesy of old comrades to a tall, fair girl who came
hurriedly up the steps.  The Countess Zara was a young woman, but one
who had stood so long on guard against the world, that the strain had
told, and her eyes were hard and untrustful, so that she looked much
older than she really was.  Her life was of two parts.  There was
little to be told of the first part; she was an English girl who had
come from a manufacturing town to study art and live alone in Paris,
where she had been too indolent to work, and too brilliant to remain
long without companions eager for her society.  Through them and the
stories of her wit and her beauty, she had come to know the King of
Messina, and with that meeting the second part of her life began; for
she had found something so attractive, either in his title or in the
cynical humor of the man himself, that for the last two years she had
followed his fortunes, and Miss Muriel Winter, art student, had become
the Countess Zara, and an uncrowned queen.  She was beautiful, with
great masses of yellow hair and wonderful brown eyes.  Her manner when
she spoke seemed to show that she despised the world and those in it
almost as thoroughly as she despised herself.

On the morning of her return from Messina, she wore a blue serge
yachting suit with a golf cloak hanging from her shoulders, and as she
crossed the terrace she pulled nervously at her gloves and held out her
hand covered with jewels to each of the two men.

"I bring good news," she said, with an excited laugh.  "Where is Louis?"

"I will tell his Majesty that you have come.  You are most welcome,"
the Baron answered.

But as he turned to the door it opened from the inside and the king
came toward them, shivering and blinking his eyes in the bright
sunlight.  It showed the wrinkles and creases around his mouth and the
blue veins under the mottled skin, and the tiny lines at the corners of
his little bloodshot eyes that marked the pace at which he had lived as
truthfully as the rings on a tree-trunk tell of its quiet growth.

He caught up his long dressing-gown across his chest as though it were
a mantle, and with a quick glance to see that there were no other
witnesses to his deshabille, bent and kissed the woman's hand, and
taking it in his own stroked it gently.

"My dear Marie," he lisped, "it is like heaven to have you back with us
again.  We have felt your absence every hour.  Pray be seated, and
pardon my robe.  I saw you through the blinds and could not wait.  Tell
us the glorious news.  The Baron's good words I have already overheard;
I listened to them with great entertainment while I was dressing.  I
hoped he would say something discourteous or foolish, but he was quite
discreet until he told Erhaupt that he had kept back none of the money.
Then I lost interest.  Fiction is never so entertaining to me as the
truth and real people.  But tell us now of your mission and of all you
did; and whether successful or not, be assured you are most welcome."

The Countess Zara smiled at him doubtfully and crossed her hands in her
lap, glancing anxiously over her shoulder.

"I must be very brief, for Kalonay and Father Paul are close behind
me," she said.  "They only stopped for a moment at the custom-house.
Keep watch, Baron, and tell me when you see them coming."

Barrat moved his chair so that it faced the garden-path, the King
crossed his legs comfortably and wrapped his padded dressing-robe
closer around his slight figure, and Erhaupt stood leaning on the back
of his chair with his eyes fixed on the fine insolent beauty of the
woman before them.

She nodded her head toward the soldiers who sat at the entrance to the
terrace, as silent and immovable as blind beggars before a mosque.  "Do
they understand?" she asked.

"No," the King assured her.  "They understand nothing, but that they
are to keep people away from me--and they do it very well.  I wish I
could import them to Paris to help Niccolas fight off creditors.
Continue, we are most impatient."

"We left here last Sunday night, as you know," she said.  "We passed
Algiers the next morning and arrived off the island at mid-day,
anchoring outside in the harbor.  We flew the Royal Yacht Squadron's
pennant, and an owner's private signal that we invented on the way
down.  They sent me ashore in a boat, and Kalonay and Father Paul
continued on along the southern shore, where they have been making
speeches in all the coast-towns and exciting the people in favor of the
revolution.  I heard of them often while I was at the capital, but not
from them.  The President sent a company of carbineers to arrest them
the very night they returned and smuggled me on board the yacht again.
We put off as soon as I came over the side and sailed directly here.

"As soon as I landed on Tuesday I went to the Hotel de Messina, and
sent my card to the President.  He is that man Palaccio, the
hotel-keeper's son, the man you sent out of the country for writing
pamphlets against the monarchy, and who lived in Sicily during his
exile.  He gave me an audience at once, and I told my story.  As he
knew who I was, I explained that I had quarrelled with you, and that I
was now prepared to sell him the secrets of an expedition which you
were fitting out with the object of re-establishing yourself on the
throne.  He wouldn't believe that there was any such expedition, and
said it was blackmail, and threatened to give me to the police if I did
not leave the island in twenty-four hours--he was exceedingly rude.  So
I showed him receipts for ammunition and rifles and Maxim guns, and
copies of the oath of allegiance to the expedition, and papers of the
yacht, in which she was described as an armored cruiser, and he rapidly
grew polite, even humble, and I made him apologize first, and then take
me out to luncheon.  That was the first day.  The second day telegrams
began to come in from the coast-towns, saying that the Prince Kalonay
and Father Paul were preaching and exciting the people to rebellion,
and travelling from town to town in a man-of-war.  Then he was
frightened.  The Prince with his popularity in the south was alarming
enough, but the Prince and Father Superior to help him seemed to mean
the end of the Republic.

"I learned while I was down there that the people think the father put
some sort of a ban on every one who had anything to do with driving the
Dominican monks out of the island and with the destruction of the
monasteries.  I don't know whether he did or not, but they believe he
did, which is the same thing, and that superstitious little beast, the
President, certainly believed it; he attributed everything that had
gone wrong on the island to that cause.  Why, if a second cousin of the
wife of a brother of one of the men who helped to fire a church falls
off his horse and breaks his leg they say that he is under the curse of
the Father Superior, and there are many who believe the Republic will
never succeed until Paul returns and the Church is re-established.  The
Government seems to have kept itself well informed about your Majesty's
movements, and it has never felt any anxiety that you would attempt to
return, and it did not fear the Church party because it knew that
without you the priests could do nothing.  But when Paul, whom the
common people look upon as a living saint and martyr, returned hand in
hand with your man Friday, they were in a panic and felt sure the end
had come.  So the President called a hasty meeting of his Cabinet.  And
such a Cabinet!  I wish you could have seen them, Louis, with me in the
centre playing on them like an advocate before a jury.  They were the
most dreadful men I ever met, bourgeois and stupid and ugly to a
degree.  Two of them were commission-merchants, and one of them is old
Dr. Gustavanni, who kept the chemist's shop in the Piazza Royale.  They
were quite silly with fear, and they begged me to tell them how they
could avert the fall of the Republic and prevent your landing.  And I
said that it was entirely a question of money; that if we were paid
sufficiently the expedition would not land and we would leave them in
peace, but that----"

The King shifted his legs uneasily, and coughed behind his thin, pink
fingers.

"That was rather indiscreet, was it not, Marie?" he murmured.  "The
idea was to make them think that I, at least, was sincere; was not that
it?  To make it appear that though there were traitors in his camp, the
King was in most desperate earnest?  If they believe that, you see, it
will allow me to raise another expedition as soon as the money we get
for this one is gone; but if you have let them know that I am the one
who is selling out, you have killed the goose that lays the golden
eggs.  They will never believe us when we cry wolf again----"

"You must let me finish," Zara interrupted.  "I did not involve you in
the least.  I said that there were traitors in the camp of whom I was
the envoy, and that if they would pay us 300,000 francs we would
promise to allow the expedition only to leave the yacht.  Their troops
could then make a show of attacking our landing-party and we would
raise the cry of `treachery' and retreat to the boats.  By this we
would accomplish two things,--we would satisfy those who, had
contributed funds toward the expedition that we had at least made an
honest effort, and your Majesty would be discouraged by such treachery
from ever attempting another attack.  The money was to be paid two
weeks later in Paris, to me or to whoever brings this ring that I wear.
The plan we finally agreed upon is this:  The yacht is to anchor off
Basnai next Thursday night.  At high tide, which is just about
daybreak, we are to lower our boats and land our men on that long beach
to the south of the break-water.  The troops of the Republic are to lie
hidden in the rocks until our men have formed.  Then they are to fire
over their heads, and we are to retreat in great confusion, return to
the yacht, and sail away.  Two weeks later they are to pay the money
into my hands, or," she added, with a smile, as she held up her fourth
finger, "to whoever brings this ring.  And I need not say that the ring
will not leave my finger."

There was a moment's pause, as though the men were waiting to learn if
she had more to tell, and then the King threw back his head and laughed
softly.  He saw Erhaupt's face above his shoulder, filled with the
amazement and indignation of a man who as a duellist and as a soldier
had shown a certain brute courage, and the King laughed again.

"What do you think of that, Colonel?" he cried, gayly.  "They are a
noble race, my late subjects."

"Bah!" exclaimed the German.  "I didn't know we were dealing with a
home for old women."

The Baron laughed comfortably.  "It is like taking money from a blind
beggar's hat," he said.

"Why, with two hundred men that I could pick up in London," Erhaupt
declared, contemptuously, "I would guarantee to put you on the throne
in a fortnight."

"Heaven forbid!" exclaimed his Majesty.  "So they surrendered as
quickly as that, did they?" he asked, nodding toward Madame Zara to
continue.

The Countess glanced again over her shoulder and bit her lips in some
chagrin.  Her eyes showed her disappointment.  "It may seem an easy
victory to you," she said, consciously, "but I doubt, knowing all the
circumstances, if any of your Majesty's gentlemen could have served you
as well.  It needed a woman and----"

"It needed a beautiful woman," interrupted the King, quickly, in a tone
that he would have used to a spoiled child.  "It needed a woman of
tact, a woman of courage, a woman among women--the Countess Zara.  Do
not imagine, Marie, that we undervalue your part.  It is their lack of
courage that distresses Colonel Erhaupt."

"One of them, it is true, did wish to fight," the Countess continued,
with a smile; "a Frenchman named Renauld, whom they have put in charge
of the army.  He scoffed at the whole expedition, but they told him
that a foreigner could not understand as they did the danger of the
popularity of the Prince Kolonay, who, by a speech or two among the
shepherds and fishermen, could raise an army."

The King snapped his fingers impatiently.

"An army of brigands and smugglers!" he exclaimed.  "That for his
popularity!"  But he instantly raised his hands as though in protest at
his own warmth of speech and in apology for his outbreak.

"His zeal will ruin us in time.  He is deucedly in the way," he
continued, in his usual tone of easy cynicism.  "We should have let him
into our plans from the first, and then if he chose to take no part in
them we would at least have had a free hand.  As it is now, we have
three different people to deceive: this Cabinet of shopkeepers, which
seems easy enough; Father Paul and his fanatics of the Church party;
and this apostle of the divine right of kings, Kalonay.  And he and the
good father are not fools----"

At these words Madame Zara glanced again toward the garden, and this
time with such evident uneasiness in her face that Barrat eyed her with
quick suspicion.

"What is it?" he asked, sharply.  "There is something you have not told
us."

The woman looked at the King, and he nodded his head as though in
assent.  "I had to tell them who else was in the plot besides myself,"
she said, speaking rapidly.  "I had to give them the name of some man
who they knew would be able to do what I have promised we could do--who
could put a stop to the revolution.  The name I gave was
his--Kalonay's."

Barrat threw himself forward in his chair.

"Kalonay's?" he cried, incredulously.

"Kalonay's?" echoed Erhaupt.  "What madness, Madame!  Why name the only
one who is sincere?"

"She will explain," said the King, in an uneasy voice; "let her
explain.  She has acted according to my orders and for the best, but I
confess I----"

"Some one had to be sacrificed," returned the woman, boldly, "and why
not he?  Indeed, if we wish to save ourselves, there is every reason
that it should be he.  You know how mad he is for the King's return,
how he himself wishes to get back to the island and to his old position
there.  Why, God only knows, but it is so.  What pleasure he finds in a
land of mists and fogs, in a ruined castle with poachers and smuggling
fishermen for companions, I cannot comprehend.  But the fact remains,
he always speaks of it as home and he wishes to return.  And now,
suppose he learns the truth, as he may at any moment, and discovers
that the whole expedition for which he is staking his soul and life is
a trick, a farce; that we use it only as a bait to draw money from the
old nobility, and to frighten the Republic into paying us to leave them
in peace?  How do we know what he might not do?  He may tell the whole
of Europe.  He may turn on you and expose you, and then what have we
left?  It is your last chance.  It is our last chance.  We have tried
everything else, and we cannot show ourselves in Europe, at least not
without money in our hands.  But by naming Kalonay I have managed it so
that we have only to show the written agreement I have made with the
Republic and he is silenced.  In it they have promised to pay the
Prince Kalonay, naming him in full, 300,000 francs if the expedition is
withdrawn.  That agreement is in my hands, and that is our answer to
whatever he may think or say.  Our word is as good as his, or as bad;
we are all of the same party as far as Europe cares, and it becomes a
falling out among thieves, and we are equal."

Baron Barrat leaned forward and marked each word with a movement of his
hand.

"Do I understand you to say," he asked, "that you have a paper signed
by the Republic agreeing to pay 300,000 francs to Kalonay?  Then how
are we to get it?" he demanded, incredulously.  "From him?"

"It is made payable to him," continued the woman, "or to whoever brings
this ring I wear to the banking-house of the Schlevingens two weeks
after the expedition has left the island.  I explained that clause to
them by saying that Kalonay and I were working together against the
King, and as he might be suspicious if we were both to leave him so
soon after the failure of the expedition we would be satisfied if they
gave the money to whichever one first presented the ring.  Suppose I
had said," she went on, turning to the King, "that it was either Barrat
or the Colonel here who had turned traitor.  They know the Baron of
old, when he was Chamberlain and ran your roulette wheel at the palace.
They know he is not the man to turn back an expedition.  And the
Colonel, if he will pardon me, has sold his services so often to one
side or another that it would have been difficult to make them believe
that this time he is sincere.  But Kalonay, the man they fear most next
to your Majesty--to have him turn traitor, why, that was a master
stroke.  Even those boors, stupid as they are, saw that.  When they
made out the agreement they put down all his titles, and laughed as
they wrote them in.  `Prince Judas' they called him, and they were in
ecstasies at the idea of the aristocrat suing for blood-money against
his sovereign, of the man they feared showing himself to be only a
common blackmailer.  It delighted them to find a prince royal sunk
lower than themselves, this man who has treated them like curs--like
the curs they are," she broke out suddenly--"like the curs they are!"

She rose and laughed uneasily as though at her own vehemence.

"I am tired," she said, avoiding the King's eyes; "the trip has tired
me.  If you will excuse me, I will go to my rooms--through your
hall-way, if I may."

"Most certainly," said the King.  "I trust you will be rested by
dinner-time.  Au revoir, my fair ambassadrice."

The woman nodded and smiled back at him brightly, and Louis continued
to look after her as she disappeared down the corridor.  He rubbed the
back of his fingers across his lips, and thoughtfully examined his
finger-nails.

"I wonder," he said, after a pause, looking up at Barrat.  The Baron
raised his eyebrows with a glance of polite interrogation.

"I wonder if Kalonay dared to make love to her on the way down."

The Baron's face became as expressionless as a death-mask, and he
shrugged his shoulders in protest.

"--Or did she make love to Kalonay?" the King insisted, laughing
gently.  "I wonder now.  I do not care to know, but I wonder."

According to tradition the Kalonay family was an older one than that of
the House of Artois, and its name had always been the one next in
importance to that of the reigning house.  The history of Messina
showed that different members of the Kalonay family had fought and died
for different kings of Artois, and had enjoyed their favor and shared
their reverses with equal dignity, and that they had stood like a
rampart when the kingdom was invaded by the levelling doctrines of
Republicanism and equality.  And though the Kalonays were men of
stouter stuff than their cousins of Artois, they had never tried to
usurp their place, but had set an example to the humblest shepherd of
unfailing loyalty and good-will to the King and his lady.  The Prince
Kalonay, who had accompanied the Dominican monk to Messina, was the
last of his race, and when Louis IV. had been driven off the island, he
had followed his sovereign into exile as a matter of course, and with
his customary good-humor.  His estates, in consequence of this step,
had been taken up by the Republic, and Kalonay had accepted the loss
philosophically as the price one pays for loving a king.  He found
exile easy to bear in Paris, and especially so as he had never
relinquished the idea that some day the King would return to his own
again.  So firmly did he believe in this, and so keenly was his heart
set upon it, that Louis had never dared to let him know that for
himself exile in Paris and the Riviera was vastly to be preferred to
authority over a rocky island hung with fogs, and inhabited by dull
merchants and fierce banditti.

The conduct of the King during their residence in Paris would have
tried the loyalty of one less gay and careless than Kalonay, for he was
a sorry monarch, and if the principle that "the King can do no wrong"
had not been bred in the young Prince's mind, he would have deserted
his sovereign in the early days of their exile.  But as it was, he made
excuses for him to others and to himself, and served the King's idle
purposes so well that he gained for himself the name of the King's
jackal, and there were some who regarded him as little better than the
King's confidential blackguard, and man Friday, the weakest if the most
charming of his court of adventurers.

At the first hint which the King gave of his desire to place himself
again in power, Kalonay had ceased to be his Jackal and would have
issued forth as a commander-in-chief, had the King permitted him; but
it was not to Louis's purpose that the Prince should know the real
object of the expedition, so he assigned its preparation to Erhaupt,
and despatched Kalonay to the south of the island.  At the same time
Madame Zara had been sent to the north of the island, ostensibly to
sound the sentiment of the old nobility, but in reality to make capital
out of the presence there of Kalonay and Father Paul.

The King rose hurriedly when the slim figure of the Prince and the
broad shoulders and tonsured head of the monk appeared at the farthest
end of the garden-walk.

"They are coming!" he cried, with a guilty chuckle; "so I shall run
away and finish dressing.  I leave you to receive the first shock of
Kalonay's enthusiasm alone.  I confess he bores me.  Remember, the
story Madame Zara told them in the yacht is the one she told us this
morning, that none of the old royalists at the capital would promise us
any assistance.  Be careful now, and play your parts prettily.  We are
all terribly in earnest."

Kalonay's enthusiasm had not spent itself entirely before the King
returned.  He had still a number of amusing stories to tell, and he
reviewed the adventures of the monk and himself with such vivacity and
humor that the King nodded his head in delight, and even the priest
smiled indulgently at the recollection.

Kalonay had seated himself on one of the tables, with his feet on a
chair and with a cigarette burning between his fingers.  He was a
handsome, dark young man of thirty, with the impulsive manner of a boy.
Dissipation had left no trace on his face, and his eyes were as
innocent of evil and as beautiful as a girl's, and as eloquent as his
tongue.  "May the Maria Santissima pity the girls they look upon," his
old Spanish nurse used to say of them.  But Kalonay had shown pity for
every one save himself.  His training at an English public school, and
later as a soldier in the Ecole Polytechnique at Paris, had saved him
from a too early fall, and men liked him instinctively, and the women
much too well.

"It was good to be back there again," he cried, with a happy sigh.  "It
was good to see the clouds following each other across the old
mountains and throwing black shadows on the campagna, and to hear the
people's patois and to taste Messinian wine again and to know it was
from your own hillside.  All our old keepers came down to the coast to
meet us, and told me about the stag-hunt the week before, and who was
married, and who was in jail, and who had been hanged for shooting a
customs officer, and they promised fine deer stalking if I get back
before the snow leaves the ridges, for they say the deer have not been
hunted and are running wild." He stopped and laughed.  "I forgot," he
said, "your Majesty does not care for the rude pleasures of my half of
the island."  Kalonay threw away his cigarette, clasping his hands
before him with a sudden change of manner.

"But seriously," he cried, "as I have been telling them--I wish your
Majesty could have heard the offers they made us, and could have seen
the tears running down their faces when we assured them that you would
return.  I wished a thousand times that we had brought you with us.
With you at our head we can sweep the island from one end to the other.
We will gather strength and force as we go, as a landslide grows, and
when we reach the capital we will strike it like a human avalanche.

"And I wish you could have heard him speak," Kalonay cried, his
enthusiasm rising as he turned and pointed with his hand at the priest.
"There is the leader!  He made my blood turn hot with his speeches, and
when he had finished I used to find myself standing on my tiptoes and
shouting with the rest.  Without him I could have done nothing.  They
knew me too well; but the laziest rascals in the village came to
welcome him again, and the women and men wept before him and brought
their children to be blessed, and fell on their knees and kissed his
sandals.  It was like the stories they tell you when you are a child.
He made us sob with regret and he filled us with fresh resolves.  Oh,
it is very well for you to smile, you old cynics," he cried, smiling at
his own fervor, "but I tell you, I have lived since I saw you last!"

The priest stood silent with his hands hidden inside his great sleeves,
and his head rising erect and rigid from his cowl.  The eyes of the men
were turned upon him curiously, and he glanced from one to the other,
as though mistrusting their sympathy.

"It was not me--it was the Church they came to welcome.  The fools," he
cried bitterly, "they thought they could destroy the faith of the
people by banishing the servants of the Church.  As soon end a mother's
love for her children by putting an ocean between them.  For six years
those peasants have been true.  I left them faithful, I returned to
find them faithful.  And now--" he concluded, looking steadily at the
King as though to hold him to account, "and now they are to have their
reward."

The King bowed his head gravely in assent.  "They are to have their
reward," he repeated.  He rose and with a wave of his hand invited the
priest to follow him, and they walked together to the other end of the
terrace.  When they were out of hearing of the others the King seated
himself, and the priest halted beside his chair.

"I wish to speak with you, father," Louis said, "concerning this young
American girl, Miss Carson, who has promised to help us--to help
you--with her money.  Has she said yet how much she means to give us,"
asked the King, "and when she means to let us have it?  It is a
delicate matter, and I do not wish to urge the lady, but we are really
greatly in need of money.  Baron Barrat, who arrived from Paris this
morning, brings back no substantial aid, although the sympathy of the
old nobility, he assures me, is with us.  Sympathy, however, does not
purchase Maxim guns, nor pay for rations, and Madame Zara's visit to
the capital was, as you know, even less successful."

"Your Majesty has seen Miss Carson, then?" the priest asked.

"Yes, her mother and she have been staying at the Continental ever
since they followed you here from Paris, and I have seen her once or
twice during your absence.  The young lady seems an earnest daughter of
our faith, and she is deeply in sympathy with our effort to
re-establish your order and the influence of the Church upon the
island.  I have explained to her that the only way in which the Church
can regain her footing there is through my return to the throne, and
Miss Carson has hinted that she is willing to make even a larger
contribution than the one she first mentioned.  If she means to do
this, it would be well if she did it at once."

"Perhaps I have misunderstood her," said the priest, after a moment's
consideration; "but I thought the sum she meant to contribute was to be
given only after the monarchy has been formally established, and that
she wished whatever she gave to be used exclusively in rebuilding the
churches and the monastery.  I do not grudge it to your Majesty's
purpose, but so I understood her."

"Ah, that is quite possible," returned Louis, easily; "it may be that
she did so intend at first, but since I have talked with her she has
shown a willing disposition to aid us not only later, but now.  My
success means your success," he continued, smiling pleasantly as he
rose to his feet, "so I trust you will urge her to be prompt.  She
seems to have unlimited resources in her own right.  Do you happen to
know from whence her money comes?"

"Her mother told me," said the priest, "that Mr. Carson before his
death owned mines and railroads.  They live in California, near the
Mission of Saint Francis.  I have written concerning them to the Father
Superior there, and he tells me that Mr. Carson died a very rich man,
and that he was a generous servant of the Church.  His daughter has but
just inherited her father's fortune, and her one idea of using it is to
give it to the Church, as he would have done."

The priest paused and seemed to consider what the King had just told
him.  "I will speak with her," he said, "and ask her aid as fully as
she can give it.  May I inquire how far your Majesty has taken her into
our plans?"

"Miss Carson is fully informed," the King replied briefly.  "And if you
wish to speak with her you can see her now; she and her mother are
coming to breakfast with me to hear the account of your visit to the
island.  You can speak with her then--and, father," the King added,
lowering his eyes and fingering the loose sleeve of the priest's robe,
"it would be well, I think, to have this presentation of the young
nobles immediately after the luncheon, while Miss Carson is still
present.  We might even make a little ceremony of it, and so show her
that she is fully in our confidence--that she is one of our most valued
supporters.  It might perhaps quicken her interest in the cause."

"I see no reason why that should not be," said the priest,
thoughtfully, turning his eyes to the sea below them.  "Madame Zara,"
he added, without moving his eyes, "will not be present."

The King straightened himself slightly, and for a brief moment of time
looked at the priest in silence, but the monk continued to gaze
steadily at the blue waters.

"Madame Zara will not be present," the King repeated, coldly.

"There are a few fishermen and mountaineers, your Majesty," the priest
continued, turning an unconscious countenance to the King, "who came
back with us from the island.  They come as a deputation to inform your
Majesty of the welcome that waits you, and I have promised them an
audience.  If you will pardon me I would suggest that you receive these
honest people at the same time with the others, and that his Highness
the Crown Prince be also present, and that he receive them with you.
Their anxiety to see him is only second to their desire to speak to
your Majesty.  You will find some of your most loyal subjects among
these men.  Their forefathers have been faithful to your house and to
the Church for many generations."

"Excellent," said the King; "I shall receive them immediately after the
deputation from Paris.  Consult with Baron Barrat and Kalonay, please,
about the details.  I wish either Kalonay or yourself to make the
presentation.  I see Miss Carson and her mother coming.  After
luncheon, then, at, say, three o'clock--will that be satisfactory?"

"As your Majesty pleases," the priest answered, and with a bow he
strode across the terrace to where Kalonay stood watching them.




II

Mrs. Carson and her daughter came from the hotel to the terrace through
the hallway which divided the King's apartments.  Baron Barrat preceded
them and they followed in single file, Miss Carson walking first.  It
was a position her mother always forced upon her, and after people grew
to know them they accepted it as illustrating Mrs. Carson's confidence
in her daughter's ability to care for herself, as well as her own wish
to remain in the background.

Patricia Carson, as she was named after her patron saint, or "Patty"
Carson, as she was called more frequently, was an exceedingly pretty
girl.  She was tall and fair, with a smile that showed such confidence
in everyone she met that few could find the courage to undeceive her by
being themselves, and it was easier, in the face of such an appeal as
her eyes made to the best in every one, for each to act a part while he
was with her.  She was young, impressionable, and absolutely
inexperienced.  As a little girl she had lived on a great ranch, where
she could gallop from sunrise to sunset over her own prairie land, and
later her life had been spent in a convent outside of Paris.  She had
but two great emotions, her love for her father and for the Church
which had nursed her.  Her father's death had sanctified him and given
him a place in her heart that her mother could not hold, and when she
found herself at twenty-one the mistress of a great fortune, her one
idea as to the disposal of it was to do with it what would best please
him and the Church which had been the ruling power in the life of both
of them.  She was quite unconscious of her beauty, and her mode of
speaking was simple and eager.

She halted as she came near the King, and resting her two hands on the
top of her lace parasol, nodded pleasantly to him and to the others.
She neither courtesied nor offered him her hand, but seemed to prefer
this middle course, leaving them to decide whether she acted as she did
from ignorance or from choice.

As the King stepped forward to greet her mother, Miss Carson passed him
and moved on to where the Father Superior stood apart from the others,
talking earnestly with the Prince.  What he was saying was of an
unwelcome nature, for Kalonay's face wore an expression of boredom and
polite protest which changed instantly to one of delight when he saw
Miss Carson.  The girl hesitated and made a deep obeisance to the
priest.

"I am afraid I interrupt you," she said.

"Not at all," Kalonay assured her, laughing.  "It is a most welcome
interruption.  The good father has been finding fault with me, as
usual, and I am quite willing to change the subject."

The priest smiled kindly on the girl, and while he exchanged some words
of welcome with her, Kalonay brought up one of the huge wicker chairs,
and she seated herself with her back to the others, facing the two men,
who stood leaning against the broad balustrade.  They had been
fellow-conspirators sufficiently long for them to have grown to know
each other well, and the priest, so far from regarding her as an
intruder, hailed her at once as a probable ally, and endeavored to
begin again where he had ceased speaking.

"Do you not agree with me, Miss Carson?" he asked.  "I am telling the
Prince that zeal is not enough, and that high ideals, unless they are
accompanied by good conduct, are futile.  I want him to change, to be
more sober, more strict----"

"Oh, you must not ask me," Miss Carson said, hurriedly, smiling and
shaking her head.  "We are working for only one thing, are we not?
Beyond that you know nothing of me, and I know nothing of you.  I came
to hear of your visit," she continued; "am I to be told anything?" she
asked, eagerly, looking from one to the other.  "It has been such an
anxious two weeks.  We imagined all manner of things had happened to
you."

Kalonay laughed happily.  "The Father was probably never safer in his
life," he said.  "They took us to their hearts like brothers.  They
might have suffocated us with kindness, but we were in no other danger."

"Then you are encouraged, Father?" she asked, turning to the priest.
"You found them loyal?  Your visit was all you hoped, you can depend
upon them?"

"We can count upon them absolutely," the monk assured her.  "We shall
start on our return voyage at once, in a day, as soon as his Majesty
gives the word."

"There are so many things I want to know," the girl said; "but I have
no right to ask," she added, looking up at him doubtfully.

"You have every right," the monk answered.  "You have certainly earned
it.  Without the help you gave us we could not have moved.  You have
been more than generous----"

Miss Carson interrupted him with an impatient lifting of her head.
"That sort of generosity is nothing," she said.  "With you men it is
different.  You are all risking something.  You are actually helping,
while I must sit still and wait.  I hope, Father," she said, smiling,
"it is not wrong for me to wish I were a man."

"Wrong!" exclaimed Kalonay, in a tone of mock dismay; "of course it's
wrong.  It's wicked."

The monk turned and looked coldly over his shoulder at Kalonay, and the
Prince laughed.

"I beg your pardon," he said, "but we are told to be contented with our
lot," he argued, impenitently.  "`He only is a slave who complains,'
and that is true even if a heretic did say it."

The monk shook his head and turned again to Miss Carson with a tolerant
smile.

"He is very young," he said, as though Kalonay did not hear him, "and
wild and foolish--and yet," he added, doubtfully, "I find I love the
boy."  He regarded the young man with a kind but impersonal scrutiny,
as though he were a picture or a statue.  "Sometimes I imagine he is
all I might have been," he said, "had not God given me the strength to
overcome myself.  He has never denied himself in anything; he is as
wilful and capricious as a girl.  He makes a noble friend, Miss Carson,
and a generous enemy; but he is spoiled irretrievably by good fortune
and good living and good health."  The priest looked at the young man
with a certain sad severity.  "`Unstable as water, thou shalt not
excel,'" he said.

The girl, in great embarrassment, turned her head away, glancing from
the ocean to the sky; but Kalonay seated himself coolly on the broad
balustrade of the terrace with his hands on his hips, and his heels
resting on the marble tiling, and clicked the soles of his boots
together.

"Oh, I have had my bad days, too, Father," he said.  He turned his head
on one side, and pressed his lips together, looking down.

"Unstable as water--that is quite possible," he said, with an air of
consideration; "but spoiled by good fortune--oh, no, that is not fair.
Do you call it good fortune, sir," he laughed, "to be an exile at
twenty-eight?  Is it good fortune to be too poor to pay your debts, and
too lazy to work; to be the last of a great name, and to have no chance
to add to the glory of it, and no means to keep its dignity fresh and
secure?  Do you fancy I like to see myself drifting farther and farther
away from the old standards and the old traditions; to have English
brewers and German Jew bankers taking the place I should have, buying
titles with their earnings and snubbing me because I can only hunt when
someone gives me a mount, and because I choose to take a purse instead
of a cup when we shoot at Monte Carlo?"

"What child's talk is this?" interrupted the priest, angrily.  "A
thousand horses cannot make a man noble, nor was poverty ever ignoble.
You talk like a weak boy.  Every word you say is your own condemnation.
Why should you complain?  Your bed is of your own making.  The other
prodigal was forced to herd with the swine--you have chosen to herd
with them."

The girl straightened herself and half rose from her chair.

"You are boring Miss Carson with my delinquencies," said the Prince,
sternly.  His face was flushed, and he did not look either at the girl
or at the priest.

"But the prodigal's father?" said Miss Carson, smiling at the older
man.  "Did he stand over him and upbraid him?  You remember, he went to
meet him when he was yet a great way off.  That was it, was it not,
Father?"

"Of course he did," cried Kalonay, laughing like a boy, and slipping
lightly to the terrace.  "He met him half way and gave him the best he
had."  He stepped to Miss Carson's side and the two young people moved
away smiling, and the priest, seeing that they were about to escape
him, cried eagerly, "But that prodigal had repented.  This one----"

"Let's run," cried the Prince.  "He will get the best of us if we stay.
He always gets the best of me.  He has been abusing me that way for two
weeks now, and he is always sorry afterward.  Let us leave him alone to
his sorrow and remorse."

Kalonay walked across the terrace with Miss Carson, bending above her
with what would have seemed to an outsider almost a proprietary right.
She did not appear to notice it, but looked at him frankly and listened
to what he had to say with interest.  He was speaking rapidly, and as
he spoke he glanced shyly at her as though seeking her approbation, and
not boldly, as he was accustomed to do when he talked with either men
or women.  To look at her with admiration was such a cheap form of
appreciation, and one so distasteful to her, that had he known it,
Kalonay's averted eyes were more of a compliment than any words he
could have spoken.  His companions who had seen him with other women
knew that his manner to her was not his usual manner, and that he gave
her something he did not give to the others; that he was more discreet
and less ready, and less at ease.

The Prince Kalonay had first met Miss Carson and her mother by chance
in Paris, at the rooms of Father Paul, where they had each gone on the
same errand, and since that meeting his whole manner toward the two
worlds in which he lived had altered so strangely that mere
acquaintances noticed the change.

Before he had met her, the little the priest had said concerning her
and her zeal for their common desire had piqued his curiosity, and his
imagination had been aroused by the picture of a romantic young woman
giving her fortune to save the souls of the people of Messina; his
people whom he regarded and who regarded him less as a feudal lord than
as a father and a comrade.  He had pictured her as a nervous, angular
woman with a pale, ascetic face, and with the restless eyes of an
enthusiast, dressed in black and badly dressed, and with a severe and
narrow intelligence.  But he had prepared himself to forgive her
personality, for the sake of the high and generous impulse that
inspired her.  And when he was presented to her as she really was, and
found her young, lovable, and nobly fair, the shock of wonder and
delight had held him silent during the whole course of her interview
with the priest, and when she had left them his brain was in a tumult
and was filled with memories of her words and gestures, and of the
sweet fearlessness of her manner.  Beautiful women he had known before
as beautiful women, but the saving grace in his nature had never before
been so deeply roused by what was fine as well as beautiful.  It seemed
as though it were too complete and perfect.  For he assured himself
that she possessed everything--those qualities which he had never
valued before because he believed them to be unattainable, and those
others which he had made his idols.  She was with him, mind and heart
and soul, in the one desire of his life that he took seriously; she was
of his religion, she was more noble than his noble sisters, and she was
more beautiful than the day.  In the first glow of the meeting it
seemed to him as though fate had called them to do this work
together,--she from the far shore of the Pacific, and he from his rocky
island in the Middle Sea.  And he saw with cruel distinctness, that if
there were one thing wanting, it was himself.  He worshipped her before
he had bowed his first good-by to her, and that night he walked for
miles up and down the long lengths of the avenue of the Champs-Elysees,
facing the great change that she had brought into his life, but knowing
himself to be utterly unfit for her coming.  He felt like an unworthy
steward caught at his master's return unprepared, with ungirt loins,
and unlighted lamp.  Nothing he had done since he was a child gave him
the right to consider himself her equal.  He was not blinded by the
approaches which other daughters and the mothers of daughters had made
him.  He knew that what was enough to excuse many things in their eyes
might find no apology in hers.  He looked back with the awakening of a
child at the irrevocable acts in his life that could not be altered nor
dug up nor hidden away.  They marked the road he had trodden like heavy
milestones, telling his story to every passer-by.  She could read them,
as everyone else could read them.  He had wasted his substance, he had
bartered his birthright for a moment's pleasure; there was no one so
low and despicable who could not call him comrade, to whom he had not
given himself without reserve.  There was nothing left, and now the one
thing he had ever wanted had come, and had found him like a bankrupt,
his credit wasted and his coffers empty.  He had placed himself at the
beck and call of every idle man and woman in Paris, and he was as
common as the great clock-face that hangs above the boulevards.

Miss Carson's feelings toward Kalonay were not of her own choosing, and
had passed through several stages.  When they had first met she had
thought it most sad that so careless and unprincipled a person should
chance to hold so important a part in the task she had set herself to
do.  She knew his class only by hearsay, but she placed him in it, and,
accordingly, at once dismissed him as a person from her mind.  Kalonay
had never shown her that he loved her, except by those signs which any
woman can read and which no man can conceal; but he did not make love
to her, and it was that which first prepossessed her in his favor.  One
or two other men who knew of her fortune, and to whom she had given as
little encouragement as she had to Kalonay, had been less considerate.
But his attitude toward her was always that of a fellow-worker in the
common cause.  He treated her with a gratitude for the help she meant
to give his people which much embarrassed her.  His seriousness pleased
her with him, seeing, as she did, that it was not his nature to be
serious, and his enthusiasm and love for his half-civilized countrymen
increased her interest in them, and her liking for him.  She could not
help but admire the way in which he accepted, without forcing her to
make it any plainer, the fact that he held no place in her thoughts.
And then she found that he began to hold more of a place in her
thoughts than she had supposed any man could hold of whom she knew so
little, and of whom the little she knew was so ill.  She missed him
when she went to the priest's and found that he had not sent for
Kalonay to bear his part in their councils; and at times she felt an
unworthy wish to hear Kalonay speak the very words she had admired him
for keeping from her.  And at last she learned the truth that she did
love him, and it frightened her, and made her miserable and happy.
They had not seen each other since he had left Paris for Messina, and
though they spoke now only of his mission to the island, there was back
of what they said the joy for each of them of being together again and
of finding that it meant so much.  What it might mean to the other,
neither knew.

For some little time the King followed the two young people with his
eyes, and then joined them, making signs to Kalonay that he wished him
to leave them together; but Kalonay remained blind to his signals, and
Barrat, seeing that it was not a tete-a-tete, joined them also.  When
he did so Kalonay asked the King for a word, and laying his hand upon
his arm walked with him down the terrace, pointing ostensibly to where
the yacht lay in the harbor.  Louis answered his pantomime with an
appropriate gesture, and then asked, sharply, "Well, what is it?  Why
did you bring me here?  And what do you mean by staying on when you see
you are not wanted?"

They were some distance from the others.  Kalonay smiled and made a
slight bow.  "Your Majesty," he began, with polite emphasis.  The King
looked at him curiously.

"In the old days under similar circumstances," the Prince continued,
with the air of a courtier rather than that of an equal, "had I thought
of forming an alliance by marriage, I should have come to your Majesty
first and asked your gracious approval.  But those days are past, and
we are living at the end of the century; and we do such things
differently."  He straightened himself and returned the King's look of
amused interest with one as cynical as his own.  "What I wanted to tell
you, Louis," he said, quietly, "is that I mean to ask Miss Carson to
become the Princess Kalonay."

The King raised his head quickly and stared at the younger man with a
look of distaste and surprise.  He gave an incredulous laugh.

"Indeed?" he said at last.  "There was always something about rich
women you could never resist."

The Prince made his acknowledgment with a shrug of his shoulders and
smiled indifferently.

"I didn't expect you to understand," he said.  "It does seem odd; it's
quite as difficult for me to understand as for you.  I have been
through it a great many times, and I thought I knew all there was of
it.  But now it seems different.  No, it does not seem different," he
corrected himself; "it is different, and I love the lady and I mean to
ask her to do me the honor to marry me.  I didn't expect you to
understand, I don't care if you do.  I only wanted to warn you."

"Warn me?" interrupted the King, with an unpleasant smile.  "Indeed!
against what?  Your tone is a trifle peremptory--but you are
interesting, most interesting!  Kalonay in a new role, Kalonay in love!
Most interesting!  Warn me against what?" he repeated sharply.

"Your Majesty has a certain manner," the Prince began, with a pretence
of hesitation, "a charm of manner, I might say, which is proverbial.
It is, we know, attractive to women.  Every woman acknowledges it.  But
your Majesty is sometimes too gracious.  He permits himself to
condescend to many women, to any woman, to women of all classes----"

"That will do," said the King; "what do you mean?"

"What I mean is this," said Kalonay, lowering his voice and looking
into the King's half-closed eyes.  "You can have all of Miss Carson's
money you want--all you can get.  I don't want it.  If I am to--marry
her at all, I am not marrying her for her money.  You can't believe
that.  It isn't essential that you should.  But I want you to leave the
woman I hope to make my wife alone.  I will allow no pretty speeches,
nor royal attentions.  She can give her money where she pleases, now
and always; but I'll not have her eyes opened to--as you can open them.
I will not have her annoyed.  And if she is----"

"Ah, and if she is?" challenged the King.  His eyes were wide apart now
and his lips were parted and drawn back from his teeth, like a snarling
cat----

"I shall hold whoever annoys her responsible," Kalonay concluded,
impersonally.

There was a moment's pause, during which the two men stood regarding
each other warily.

Then the King stiffened his shoulders and placed his hands slowly
behind his back.  "That sounds, my dear Kalonay," he said, "almost like
a threat."

The younger man laughed insolently.  "I meant it, too, your Majesty,"
he answered, bowing mockingly and backing away.

As the King's guests seated themselves at his breakfast-table Louis
smiled upon them with a gracious glance of welcome and approval.  His
manner was charmingly condescending, and in his appearance there was
nothing more serious than an anxiety for their better entertainment and
a certain animal satisfaction in the food upon his plate.

In reality his eyes were distributing the people at the table before
him into elements favorable or unfavorable to his plans, and in his
mind he shuffled them and their values for him or against him as a
gambler arranges and rearranges the cards in his hand.  He saw himself
plainly as his own highest card, and Barrat and Erhaupt as willing but
mediocre accomplices.  In Father Paul and Kalonay he recognized his
most powerful allies or most dangerous foes.  Miss Carson meant nothing
to him but a source from which he could draw the sinews of war.  What
would become of her after the farce was ended, he did not consider.  He
was not capable of comprehending either her or her motives, and had he
concerned himself about her at all, he would have probably thought that
she was more of a fool than the saint she pretended to be, and that she
had come to their assistance more because she wished to be near a
Prince and a King than because she cared for the souls of sixty
thousand peasants.  That she would surely lose her money, and could
hardly hope to escape from them without losing her good name, did not
concern him.  It was not his duty to look after the reputation of any
American heiress who thought she could afford to be unconventional.
She had a mother to do that for her, and she was pretty enough, he
concluded, to excuse many things,--so pretty that he wondered if he
might brave the Countess Zara and offer Miss Carson the attentions to
which Kalonay had made such arrogant objections.  The King smiled at
the thought, and let his little eyes fall for a moment on the tall
figure of the girl with its crown of heavy golden hair, and on her
clever, earnest eyes.  She was certainly worth waiting for, and in the
meanwhile she was virtually unprotected and surrounded by his own
people.  According to his translation of her acts, she had already
offered him every encouragement, and had placed herself in a position
which to his understanding of the world could have but one
interpretation.  What Kalonay's sudden infatuation might mean he could
not foresee; whether it promised good or threatened evil, he could only
guess, but he decided that the young man's unwonted show of
independence of the morning must be punished.  His claim to exclusive
proprietorship in the young girl struck the King as amusing, but
impertinent.  It would be easy sailing in spite of all, he decided; for
somewhere up above them in the hotel sat the unbidden guest, the woman
against whom Father Paul had raised the ban of expulsion, but who had,
nevertheless, tricked both him and the faithful Jackal.

The breakfast was drawing to an end and the faithful Niccolas was the
only servant remaining in the room.  The talk had grown intimate and
touched openly upon the successful visit of the two ambassadors to the
island, and of Barrat's mission to Paris.  Of Madame Zara's visit to
the northern half of the island, which was supposed to have been less
successful, no mention was made.

Louis felt as he listened to them like a man at a play, who knows that
at a word from him the complications would cease, and that were he to
rise in the stalls and explain them away, and point out the real hero
and denounce the villain, the curtain would have to ring down on the
instant.  He gave a little purr of satisfaction, and again marshalled
his chances before him and smiled to find them good.  He was grandly at
peace with himself and with the world.  Whatever happened, he was
already richer by some 300,000 francs, and in a day, if he could keep
the American girl to her expedition had been played he would be
free,--free to return to his clubs and to his boulevards and boudoirs,
with money enough to silence the most insolent among his creditors, and
with renewed credit; with even a certain glamour about him of one who
had dared to do, even though he had failed in the doing, who had shaken
off the slothfulness of ease and had chosen to risk his life for his
throne with a smoking rifle in his hand, until a traitor had turned
fortune against him.

The King was amused to find that this prospect pleased him vastly.  He
was surprised to discover that, careless as he thought himself to be to
public opinion, he was still capable of caring for its approbation; but
he consoled himself for this weakness by arguing that it was only
because the approbation would be his by a trick that it pleased him to
think of.  Perhaps some of his royal cousins, in the light of his bold
intent, might take him under their protection instead of neglecting him
shamefully, as they had done in the past.  His armed expedition might
open certain doors to him; his name--and he smiled grimly as he
imagined it--would ring throughout Europe as the Soldier King, as the
modern disciple of the divine right of kings.  He saw, in his mind's
eye, even the possibility of a royal alliance and a pension from one of
the great Powers.  No matter where he looked he could see nothing but
gain to himself, more power for pleasure, more chances of greater
fortune in the future, and while his lips assented to what the others
said, and his eyes thanked them for some expression of loyalty or
confidence, he saw himself in dreams as bright as an absinthe
drinker's, back in his beloved Paris: in the Champs-Elysees behind fine
horses, lolling from a silk box at the opera, dealing baccarat at the
jockey Club, or playing host to some beautiful woman of the hour, in
the new home he would establish for her in the discreet and leafy
borders of the Bois.

He had forgotten his guests and the moment.  He had forgotten that
there were difficulties yet to overcome, and with a short, indrawn sigh
of pleasure, he threw back his head and smiled arrogantly upon the
sunny terrace and the green palms and the brilliant blue sea, as though
he challenged the whole beautiful world before him to do aught but
minister to his success and contribute to his pleasures.

And at once, as though in answer to his challenge, a tall, slim young
man sprang lightly up the steps of the terrace, passed the bewildered
guards with a cheery nod, and, striding before the open windows,
knocked with his fist upon the portals of the door, as sharply and as
confidently as though the King's shield had hung there, and he had
struck it with a lance.

The King's dream shattered and faded away at the sound, and he moved
uneasily in his chair.  He had the gambler's superstitious regard for
trifles, and this invasion of his privacy by a confident stranger
filled him with sudden disquiet.

He saw Kalonay staring at the open windows with an expression of
astonishment and dismay.

"Who is it?" the King asked, peevishly.  "What are you staring at?  How
did he get in?"

Kalonay turned on Barrat, sitting at his right.  "Did you see him?" he
asked.  Barrat nodded gloomily.

"The devil!" exclaimed the Prince, as though Barrat had confirmed his
guess.  "I beg your pardon," he said, nodding his head toward the
women.  He pushed back his chair and stood irresolutely with his napkin
in his hand.  "Tell him we are not in, Niccolas," he commanded.

"He saw us as he passed the window," the Baron objected.

"Say we are at breakfast then.  I will see him myself in a moment.
What shall I tell him?" he asked, turning to Barrat.  "Do you think he
knows?  He must know, they have told him in Paris."

"You are keeping us waiting," said the King.  "What is it?  Who is this
man?"

"An American named Gordon.  He is a correspondent," Kalonay answered,
without turning his head.  His eyes were still fixed on the terrace as
though he had seen a ghost.

The King slapped his hand on the arm of the chair.  "You promised me,"
he said, "that we should be free from that sort of thing.  That is why
I agreed to come here instead of going to Algiers.  Go out, Barrat, and
send him away."

Barrat pressed his lips together and shook his head.

"You can't send him away like that," he said.  "He is a very important
young man."

"Find out how much he will take, then," exclaimed the King, angrily,
"and give it to him.  I can better afford to pay blackmail to any
amount than have my plans spoiled now by the newspapers.  Give him what
he wants--a fur coat--they always wear fur coats--or five thousand
francs, or something--anything--but get rid of him."

Barrat stirred uneasily in his chair and shrugged his shoulders.  "He
is not a boulevard journalist," he replied, sulkily.

"Your Majesty is thinking of the Hungarian Jews at Vienna," explained
Kalonay, "who live on chantage and the Monte Carlo propaganda fund.
This man is not in their class; he is not to be bought.  I said he was
an American."

"An American!" exclaimed Mrs. Carson and her daughter, exchanging rapid
glances.  "Is it Archie Gordon you mean?" the girl asked.  "I thought
he was in China."

"That is the man--Archie Gordon.  He writes books and explores places,"
Kalonay answered.

"I know him.  He wrote a book on the slave trade in the Congo,"
contributed Colonel Erhaupt.  "I met him at Zanzibar.  What does he
want with us?"

"He was in Yokohama when the Japanese-Chinese war broke out," said
Kalonay, turning to the King, "and he cabled a London paper he would
follow the war for it if they paid him a hundred a week.  He meant
American dollars, but they thought he meant pounds, so they cabled back
that they'd pay one-half that sum.  He answered, `One hundred or
nothing,' and they finally assented to that, and he started; and when
the first week's remittance arrived, and he received five hundred
dollars instead of the one hundred he expected, he sent back the
difference."

"What a remarkable young man!" exclaimed the King.  "He is much too
good for daily wear.  We don't want anyone like that around here, do
we?"

"I know Mr. Gordon very well," said Miss Carson.  "He lived in San
Francisco before he came East.  He was always at our house, and was a
great friend of the family; wasn't he, mother?  We haven't seen him for
two years now, but I know he wouldn't spoil our plans for the sake of
his paper, if he knew we were in earnest, if he understood that
everything depended upon its being kept a secret."

"We are not certain that he knows anything," the King urged.  "He may
not have come here to see us.  I think Father Paul should talk with him
first."

"I was going to suggest," said Miss Carson, with some hesitation, "that
if I spoke to him I might be able to put it to him in such a way that
he would see how necessary it----"

"Oh, excellent!" exclaimed the King, eagerly, and rising to his feet;
"if you only would be so kind, Miss Carson."

Kalonay, misunderstanding the situation altogether, fastened his eyes
upon the table and did not speak.

"He has not come to see you, Patricia," said Mrs. Carson, quietly.

"He does not know that I am here," Miss Carson answered; "but I'm sure
if he did he would be very glad to see us again.  And if we do see him
we can make him promise not to do anything that might interfere with
our plans.  Won't you let me speak to him, mother?"

Mrs. Carson turned uncertainly to the priest for direction, and his
glance apparently reassured her, for she rose, though still with a
troubled countenance, and the two women left the room together, the men
standing regarding each other anxiously across the table.  When they
had gone the King lit a cigarette and, turning his back on his
companions, puffed at it nervously in silence.  Kalonay sat moodily
studying the pattern on the plate before him, and the others whispered
together at the farther end of the table.

When Miss Carson and her mother stepped out upon the terrace, the
American was standing with his back toward them and was speaking to the
guards who sat cross-legged at the top of the steps.  They showed no
sign of surprise at the fact of his addressing them in their own tongue
further than that they answered him with a show of respect which they
had not exhibited toward those they protected.  The American turned as
he heard the footsteps behind him, and, after a startled look of
astonishment, hurried toward the two women, exclaiming, with every
expression of pleasure.

"I had no idea you were stopping here," he said, after the first
greetings were over.  "I thought you were somewhere on the Continent.
I am so glad I caught you.  It seems centuries since I saw you last.
You're looking very well, Mrs. Carson--and as for Patty--I am almost
afraid of her--I've been hearing all sorts of things about you lately,
Patty," he went on, turning a smiling countenance toward the girl.
"About your engagements to princes and dukes--all sorts of disturbing
rumors.  What a terrible swell you've grown to be.  I hardly recognize
you at all, Mrs. Carson.  It isn't possible this is the same young girl
I used to take buggy riding on Sunday evenings?"

"Indeed, it is not.  I wish it were," said Mrs. Carson, plaintively,
sinking into a chair.  "I'm glad to see you're not changed, Archie,"
she added, with a sigh.

"Why, he's very much changed, mother," the girl said.  "He's taller,
and, in comparison with what he was, he's almost wasted away, and so
sunburned I hardly knew him.  Except round the forehead," she added,
mockingly, "and I suppose the sun couldn't burn there because of the
laurel-wreaths.  I hear they bring them to you fresh every morning."

"They're better than coronets, at any rate," Gordon answered, with a
nod.  "They're not so common.  And if I'm wasted away, can you wonder?
How long has it been since I saw you, Patty?"

"No, I'm wrong, he's not changed," Miss Carson said dryly, as she
seated herself beside her mother.

"How do you two come to be stopping here?" the young man asked.  "I
thought this hotel had been turned over to King Louis?"

"It has," Mrs. Carson answered.  "We are staying at the Continental, on
the hill there.  We are only here for breakfast.  He asked us to
breakfast."

"He?" repeated Gordon, with an incredulous smile.  "Who?  Not the
King--not that blackguard?"

Miss Carson raised her head, and stared at him in silence, and her
mother gave a little gasp, apparently of relief and satisfaction.

"Yes," Miss Carson answered at last, coldly.  "We are breakfasting with
him.  What do you know against him?"

Gordon stared at her with such genuine astonishment that the girl
lowered her eyes, and, bending forward in her chair, twirled her
parasol nervously between her fingers.

"What do I know against him?  Why, Patty!" he exclaimed.  "How did you
meet him, in Heaven's name?" he asked, roughly.  "Have you been seen
with him?  Have you known him long?  Who had the impudence to present
him?"

Mrs. Carson looked up, now thoroughly alarmed.  Her lower lip was
trembling, and she twisted her gloved hands together in her lap.

"What do you know against him?" Miss Carson repeated, meeting Gordon's
look with one as full of surprise as his own.

The young man regarded her steadily for a few moments, and then, with a
change of manner, as though he now saw the situation was much more
serious than he had at first supposed, drew up a chair in front of the
two women and seated himself deliberately.

"Has he borrowed any money from you yet?" he asked.  Miss Carson's face
flushed crimson and she straightened her shoulders and turned her eyes
away from Gordon with every sign of indignation and disapproval.  The
young man gave an exclamation of relief.

"No?  That's good.  You cannot have known him so very long.  I am
greatly relieved."

"Louis of Messina," he began more gently, "is the most unscrupulous
rascal in Europe.  Since they turned him out of his kingdom he has
lived by selling his title to men who are promoting new brands of
champagne or floating queer mining shares.  The greater part of his
income is dependent on the generosity of the old nobility of Messina,
and when they don't pay him readily enough, he levies blackmail on
them.  He owes money to every tailor and horse-dealer and hotel-keeper
in Europe, and no one who can tell one card from another will play with
him.  That is his reputation.  And to help him live up to it he has
surrounded himself with a parcel of adventurers as rascally as himself:
a Colonel Erhaupt who was dropped from a German regiment, and who is a
Colonel only by the favor of the Queen of Madagascar; a retired
croupier named Barrat; and a fallen angel called Kalonay, a fellow of
the very best blood in Europe and with the very worst morals.  They
call him the King's jackal, and he is one of the most delightful
blackguards I ever met.  So is the King for that matter, a most
entertaining individual if you keep him in his place, but a man no
woman can know.  In fact, Mrs. Carson," Gordon went on, addressing
himself to the mother, "when you have to say that a woman has
absolutely no reputation whatever you can best express it by explaining
that she has a title from Louis of Messina.  That is his Majesty's way
of treating his feminine friends when they bore him and he wants to get
rid of them.  He gives them a title.

"The only thing the man ever did that was to his credit and that could
be discussed in polite society is what he is doing now at this place,
at this moment.  For it seems," Gordon whispered, drawing his chair
closer, "that he is about to show himself something of a man after all,
and that he is engaged in fitting out an armed expedition with which he
hopes to recover his kingdom.  That's what brought me here, and I must
say I rather admire him for attempting such a thing.  Of course, it was
Kalonay who put him up to it; he would never have stirred from the
boulevards if that young man had not made him.  But he is here,
nevertheless, waiting for a favorable opportunity to sail, and he has
ten thousand rifles and three Maxim guns lying in his yacht out there
in the harbor.  That's how I came to learn about it.  I was getting an
estimate on an outfit I was thinking of taking into Yucatan from my old
gunsmith in the Rue Scribe, and he dropped a hint that he had shipped
ten thousand rifles to Tangier, to Colonel Erhaupt.  I have met Erhaupt
in Zanzibar, and knew he was the King's right-hand man, so I put two
and two together and decided I would follow them up, and----"

"Yes, and now," interrupted Miss Carson, sharply--"and now that you
have followed them up, what do you mean to do?"

Gordon looked his surprise at her earnestness, but answered that he did
not know what he would do; he thought he would either ask them to give
him a commission in their expedition, and let him help them fight, and
write an account of their adventures later, or he would telegraph the
story at once to his paper.  It was with him, he said, entirely a
question as to which course would be of the greater news value.  If he
told what he now knew, his paper would be the first of all others to,
inform the world of the expedition and the proposed revolution; while
if he volunteered for the expedition and waited until it had failed or
succeeded, he would be able to tell more eventually, but would have to
share it with other correspondents.

Miss Carson regarded him with an expression in which indignation and
entreaty were curiously blended.

"Archie," she said, in a low voice, "you do not know what you are doing
or saying.  You are threatening to spoil the one thing in my life on
which I have set my heart.  The return of this man to his throne,
whether he is worthy or not, means the restoration of the Catholic
Church on that island; it means the return of the monks and the
rebuilding of the monasteries, and the salvation of sixty thousand
souls.  I know all that they mean to do.  I am the one who paid for
those rifles that brought you here; you have told me only what I have
known for months, and for which I have been earnestly working and
praying.  I am not blinded by these men.  They are not the creatures
you describe; but no matter what they may be, it is only through them,
and through them alone, that I can do what I have set out to do."

Gordon silenced her with a sweep of his hand.  "Do you mean to tell
me," he demanded, "that you are mixed up in this--with these--that they
have taken money from you, and told you they meant to use it to
re-establish the Church?  Mrs. Carson," he exclaimed, bitterly, turning
upon her, "why have you allowed this--what have you been doing while
this was going on?  Do you suppose those scoundrels care for the
Church--the Church, indeed!  Wait until I see them--any of
them--Erhaupt by choice, and I'll make them give up every franc you've
lent them, or I'll horsewhip and expose them for the gang of welshers
and thimble-riggers they are; or if they prefer their own methods, I'll
call them out in rotation and shoot their arms and legs off."  He
stopped and drew a long breath, either of content that he had
discovered the situation in time to take some part in it, or at the
prospect of a fight.

"The idea of you two helpless females wandering into this den of
wolves!" he exclaimed, indignantly.  "It's about time you had a man to
look after you!  You go back to your hotel now, and let me have a chat
with Louis of Messina.  He's kept me waiting some twenty minutes as it
is, and that's a little longer than I can give him.  I'm not a
creditor."  He rose from his chair; but Miss Carson put out her hand
and motioned him to be seated.

"Archie," she said, "I like the way you take this, even though you are
all wrong about it, because it's just like you to fly into a passion
and want to fight someone for somebody.  If your conclusions were
anywhere near the truth, you would be acting very well.  But they are
not.  The King is not handling my money, nor the Prince Kalonay.  It is
in the keeping of Father Paul, the Father Superior of the Dominican
monks, who is the only one of these people I know or who knows me.  He
is not a swindler, too, is he, or a retired croupier?  Listen to me
now, and do not fly out like that at me, or at mother.  It is not her
fault.  Last summer mother and I went to Messina as tourists, and one
day, when passing through a seaport town, we saw a crowd of people on
the shore, standing or kneeling by the hundreds in a great semicircle
close to the water's edge.  There was a priest preaching to them from
an open boat.  It was like a scene from the New Testament, and the man,
this Father Paul, made me think of one of the disciples.  I asked them
why he did not preach on the land, and they told me that he and all of
the priests had been banished from the island six years before, and
that they could only return by stealth and dared not land except by
night.  When the priest had finished speaking, I had myself rowed out
to his boat, and I talked a long time with him, and he told me of this
plan to re-establish himself and his order.  I offered to help him with
my money, and he promised me a letter to Cardinal Napoli.  It reached
me on my return to Rome, and through the influence of the Cardinal I
was given an audience with the Pope, and I was encouraged to aid Father
Paul as far as I could.  I had meant to build a memorial church for
father, but they urged me to give the money instead to this cause.  All
my dealings until to-day have been with Father Paul alone.  I have seen
a little of the Prince Kalonay because they are always together; but he
has always treated me in a way to which no one could take exception,
and he is certainly very much in earnest.  When Father Paul left Paris
mother and I came on here in order to be near him, and that is how you
find me at Tangier.  And now that you understand how much this means to
me, I know you will not do anything to stand in our way.  Those men
inside are afraid that you came here for just the reason that
apparently has brought you, and when they saw you a little while ago
through the windows they were greatly disturbed.  Let me tell them that
you mean to volunteer for the campaign.  The King cannot refuse the
services of a man who has done the things you are always doing.  And I
promise you that for a reward you shall be the only one to tell the
story of our attempt.  I promise you," she repeated earnestly, "that
the day we enter the capital, you can cable whatever you please and
tell our story to the whole of Europe."

"The story be hanged!" replied Gordon.  "You have made this a much more
serious business than a newspaper story.  You misunderstand me utterly,
Patty.  I am here now because I am not going to have you compromised
and robbed."

The girl stood up and looked down at the young man indignantly.

"You have no right whatever to use that tone to me," she said.  "I am
of age and my own adviser.  I am acting for the good of a great number
of people, and according to what my conscience and common sense tell me
is right.  I shall hate you if you attempt to interfere.  You can do
one of two things, Archie.  I give you your choice: you can either go
with them as a volunteer, and promise to keep our secret; or you can
cable what you know now, what you know only by accident, but if you do,
you will lose your best friend, and you will defeat a good and a noble
effort."

Gordon leaned back in his chair, and looked up at her steadily for a
brief moment, and then rose with a smile, and bowed to the two women in
silence.  He crossed the terrace quickly with an amused and puzzled
countenance, and walked into the breakfast-room, from the windows of
which, as he rightly guessed, the five conspirators had for some time
observed him.  He looked from one to the other of the men about the
table, until his eyes finally met those of the King.

"I believe, sir, you are leading an expedition against the Republic of
Messina?" Gordon said.  "I am afraid it can't start unless you take me
with you."




III

The presence in Tangier of the King of Messina and his suite, and the
arrival there of the French noblemen who had volunteered for the
expedition, could not escape the observation of the resident
Consuls-General and of the foreign colony, and dinners, riding and
hunting parties, pig-sticking, and excursions on horseback into the
outlying country were planned for their honor and daily entertainment.
Had the conspirators held aloof from these, the residents might have
asked, since it was not to enjoy themselves, what was the purpose of
their stay in Tangier; and so, to allay suspicion as to their real
object, different members of the expedition had been assigned from time
to time to represent the visitors at these festivities.  On the morning
following the return of the yacht from Messina, an invitation to ride
to a farmhouse some miles out of Tangier and to breakfast there had
been sent to the visitors, and the King had directed the Prince
Kalonay, and half of the delegation from Paris, to accept it in his
name.

They were well content to go, and rode forth gayly and in high spirits,
for the word had been brought them early in the morning that the
expedition was already prepared to move, and that same evening at
midnight the yacht would set sail for Messina.  They were careless as
to what fortune waited for them there.  The promise of much excitement,
of fighting and of danger, of possible honor and success, stirred the
hearts of the young men gloriously, and as they galloped across the
plains, or raced each other from point to point, or halted to jump
their ponies across the many gaping crevices which the sun had split in
the surface of the plain, they filled the still, warm air with their
shouts and laughter.  In the party there were many ladies, and the
groups changed and formed again as they rode forward, spread out on
either side of the caravan-trail and covering the plain like a skirmish
line of cavalry.  But Kalonay kept close at Miss Carson's stirrup,
whether she walked her pony or sent him flying across the hard,
sunbaked soil.

"I hope you won't do that again," he said, earnestly, as she drew up
panting, with her sailor hat and hair falling to her shoulders.  They
had been galloping recklessly over the open crevices in the soil.

"It's quite the nastiest country I ever saw," he said.  "It looks as
though an earthquake had shaken it open and had forgotten to close it
again.  Believe me, it is most unsafe and dangerous.  Your pony might
stumble--" He stopped, as though the possibilities were too serious for
words, but the girl laughed.

"It's no more dangerous than riding across our prairie at dusk when you
can't see the barbed wire.  You are the last person in the world to
find fault because a thing is dangerous," she added.

They had reached the farm, where they went to breakfast, and the young
Englishman who was their host was receiving his guests in his garden,
and the servants were passing among them, carrying cool drinks and
powdered sweets and Turkish coffee.  Kalonay gave their ponies to a
servant and pointed with his whip to an arbor that stood at one end of
the garden.

"May we sit down there a moment until they call us?" he said.  "I have
news of much importance--and I may not have another chance," he begged,
looking at her wistfully.  The girl stood motionless; her eyes were
serious, and she measured the distance down the walk to the arbor as
though she saw it beset with dangers more actual than precipices and
twisted wire.  The Prince watched her as though his fate was being
weighed in his presence.

"Very well," she said at last, and moved on before him down the
garden-path.

The arbor was open to the air with a low, broad roof of palm-leaves
that overhung it on all sides and left it in deep shadow.  Around it
were many strange plants and flowers, some native to Morocco and some
transplanted from their English home.  From where they sat they could
see the other guests moving in and out among the groves of orange and
olive trees and swaying palms, and standing, outlined against the blue
sky, upon the low, flat roof of the farm-house.

"I have dared to ask you to be so good as to give me this moment," the
Prince said humbly, "only because I am going away, and it may be my
last chance to speak with you.  You do not mind?  You do not think I
presume?"

"No, I do not mind," said the girl, smiling.  "In my country we do not
think it a terrible offence to talk to a girl at a garden-party.  But
you said there was something of importance you wanted to say to me.
You mean the expedition?"

"Yes," said Kalonay.  "We start this evening."  The girl raised her
head slightly and stared past him at the burning white walls and the
burning blue sky that lay outside the circle of shadow in which they
sat.

"This evening--" she repeated to herself.

"We reach there in two days," Kalonay continued; "and then we--then we
go on--until we enter the capital."

The girl's head was bent, and she looked at her hands as they lay in
her lap and frowned at them, they seemed so white and pretty and
useless.

"Yes, you go on," she repeated, "and we stay here.  You are a man and
able to go on.  I know what that means.  And you like it," she added,
with a glance of mingled admiration and fear.  "You are glad to fight
and to risk death and to lead men on to kill other men."

Kalonay drew lines in the sand with his ridingwhip, and did not raise
his head.

"I suppose it is because you are fighting for your home," the girl
continued, "and to set your country free, and that you can live with
your own people again, and because it is a holy war.  That must be it.
Now that it is really come, I see it all differently.  I see things I
had not thought about before.  They frighten me," she said.

The Prince raised his head and faced the girl, clasping the end of his
whip nervously in his hand.  "If we should win the island for the
King," he said, "I believe it will make a great change in me.  I shall
be able to go freely then to my home, as you say, to live there always,
to give up the life I have led on the Continent.  It has been a foolish
life--a dog's life--and I have no one to blame for it but myself.  I
made it worse than it need to have been.  But if we win, I have
promised myself that I will not return to it; and if we fall I shall
not return to it, for the reason that I shall have been killed.  I
shall have much power if we win.  When I say much power, I mean much
power in Messina, in that little corner of the world, and I wish to use
it worthily and well.  I am afraid I should not have thought of it," he
went on, naively, as though he were trying to be quite fair, "had not
Father Paul pointed out to me what I should do, how I could raise the
people and stop the abuses which made them drive us from the island.
The people must be taxed less heavily, and the money must be spent for
them and not for us, on roads and harbors and schools, not at the
Palace on banquets and fetes.  These are Father Paul's ideas, not
mine,--but now I make them mine." He rose and paced the length of the
little arbor, his hands clasped behind him and his eyes bent on the
ground.  "Yes, that is what I mean to do," he said.  "That is the way I
mean to live.  And if we fail, I mean to be among those who are to die
on the fortifications of the capital, so that with me the Kalonay
family will end, and end fighting for the King, as many of my people
have done before me.  There is no other way.  For me there shall be no
more idleness nor exile.  I must either live on to help my people, or I
must die with them."  He stopped in his walk and regarded the girl
closely.  "You may be thinking, it is easy for him to promise this, it
is easy to speak of what one will do.  I know that.  I know that I can
point back at nothing I have done that gives me any right to ask you to
believe me now.  But I do ask it, for if you believe me--believe what I
say--it makes it easier for me to tell you why after this I must live
worthily.  But you know why?  You must know; it is not possible that
you do not know."

He sat down beside her on the bench, leaning forward and crushing his
hands together on his knee.  "It is because I love you.  Because I love
you so that everything which is not worthy is hateful to me, myself
most of all.  It is the only thing that counts.  I used to think I knew
what love meant; I used to think love was a selfish thing that needed
love in return, that it must be fed on love to live, that it needed
vows and tender speeches and caresses, or it would die.  I know now
that when one truly cares, he does not ask whether the other cares or
not.  It is what one gives that counts, not what one receives.  You
have given me nothing--nothing--not a word nor a look; yet since I have
known you I have been more madly happy in just knowing that you live
than I would have been had any other woman in all the world thrown
herself into my arms and said she loved me above all other men.  I am
not fit to tell you this.  But to-night I go to try myself, either
never to see you again, or to come back perhaps more worthy to love
you.  Think of this when I am gone.  Do not speak to me now.  I may
have made you hate me for speaking so, or I may have made you pity me;
so let me go not knowing, just loving you, worshipping you, and holding
you apart and above all other people.  I go to fight for you, do you
understand?  Not for our Church, not for my people, but for you, to
live or die for you.  And I ask nothing from you but that you will let
me love you always."

The Prince bent, and catching up Miss Carson's riding-gloves that lay
beside her on the bench, kissed them again and again, and then, rising
quickly, walked out of the arbor into the white sunshine, and, without
turning, mounted his pony and galloped across the burning desert in the
direction of Tangier.

Archie Gordon had not been invited to join the excursion into the
country, nor would he have accepted it, for he wished to be by himself
that he might review the situation and consider what lay before him.
He sat with his long legs dangling over the broad rampart which
overlooks the harbor of Tangier.  He was whistling meditatively to
himself and beating an accompaniment to the tune with his heels.  At
intervals he ceased whistling while he placed a cigar between his teeth
and pulled upon it thoughtfully, resuming his tune again at the point
where it had been interrupted.  Below him the waves ran up lazily on
the level beach and sank again, dragging the long sea-weed with them,
as they swept against the sharp rocks, and exposed them for an instant,
naked and glistening in the sun.  On either side of him the town
stretched to meet the low, white, sand-hills in a crescent of low,
white houses pierced by green minarets and royal palms.  A warm sun had
sent the world to sleep at mid-day, and an enforced peace hung over the
glaring white town and the sparkling blue sea.  Gordon blinked at the
glare, but his eyes showed no signs of drowsiness.  They were, on the
contrary, awake to all that passed on the high road behind him, and on
the sandy beach at his feet, while at the same time his mind was busily
occupied in reviewing what had occurred the day before, and in
adjusting new conditions.  At the hotel he had found that the situation
was becoming too complicated, and that it was impossible to feel sure
of the truth of anything, or of the sincerity of anyone.  Since the
luncheon hour the day before he had become a fellow-conspirator with
men who were as objectionable to him in every way as he knew he was
obnoxious to them.  But they had been forced to accept him because, so
they supposed, he had them at the mercy of his own pleasure.  He knew
their secret, and in the legitimate pursuit of his profession he could,
if he chose, inform the island of Messina, with the rest of the world,
of their intention toward it, and bring their expedition to an end,
though he had chosen, as a reward for his silence, to become one of
themselves.  Only the Countess Zara had guessed the truth, that it was
Gordon himself who was at their mercy, and that so long as the American
girl persisted in casting her fortunes with them her old young friend
was only too eager to make any arrangement with them that would keep
him at her side.

It was a perplexing position, and Gordon turned it over and over in his
mind.  Had it not been that Miss Carson had a part in it he would have
enjoyed the adventure, as an adventure, keenly.  He had no objections
to fighting on the side of rascals, or against rascals.  He objected to
them only in the calmer moments of private life; and as he was of
course ignorant that the expedition was only a make-believe, he felt a
certain respect for his fellow-conspirators as men who were willing to
stake their lives for a chance of better fortune.  But that their
bravery was of the kind which would make them hesitate to rob and
deceive a helpless girl he very much doubted; for he knew that even the
bravest of warriors on their way to battle will requisition a herd of
cattle or stop to loot a temple.  The day before, Gordon had witnessed
the brief ceremony which attended the presentation of the young
noblemen from Paris who had volunteered for the expedition in all good
faith, and he reviewed it and analyzed it as he sat smoking on the
ramparts.

It had been an impressive ceremony, in spite of the fact that so few
had taken part in it, but the earnestness of the visitors and the
enthusiasm of Kalonay and the priest had made up for the lack of
numbers.  The scene had appealed to him as one of the most dramatic he
had witnessed in the pursuit of a calling in which looking on at real
dramas was the most frequent duty, and he had enjoyed the strange
mixture of ancient terms of address and titles with the modern manners
of the men themselves.  It had interested him to watch Baron Barrat
bring out the ancient crown and jewelled sceptre which had been the
regalia of all the Kings of Messina since the Crusades and spread them
out upon a wicker tea-table, from which Niccolas had just removed some
empty coffee-cups, half filled with the ends of cigarettes, some
yellow-backed novels, and a copy of the Paris Figaro.  It was also
interesting to him to note how the sight of the little heir-apparent
affected both the peasants from the mountains and the young nobles from
the Club Royale.  The former fell upon their knees with the tears
rolling down the furrows in their tanned cheeks, while the little
wise-eyed boy stood clinging to his nurse's skirts with one hand and to
his father's finger with the other, and nodded his head at them gravely
like a toy mandarin.

Then the King had addressed them in a dignified, earnest, and almost
eloquent speech, and had promised much and prophesied the best of
fortunes, and then, at the last, had turned suddenly toward Miss
Carson, where she stood in the background between her mother and Father
Paul.

"Every cause has its Joan of Arc, or its Maria Theresa," he cried,
looking steadfastly at Miss Carson.  "No cause has succeeded without
some good woman to aid it.  To help us, my friends, we have a daughter
of the people, as was Joan of Arc, and a queen, as was Maria Theresa,
for she comes from that country where every woman is a queen in her own
right, and where the love of liberty is inherent."  The King took a
quick step backward, and taking Miss Carson's hand drew her forward
beside him and placed her facing his audience, while the girl made vain
efforts to withdraw her hand.  "This is she," he said earnestly, "the
true daughter of the Church who has made it possible for us to return
to our own again.  It is due to her that the King of Messina shall sit
once more on his throne; it is through her generosity alone that the
churches will rise from their ruins and that you will once again hear
the Angelus ring across the fields at sunset.  Remember her, my friends
and cousins, pray for her as a saint upon earth, and fight gloriously
to help her to success!"

Gordon had restrained himself with difficulty while this scene was
being enacted; he could not bear the thought of the King touching the
girl's hand.  He struggled to prevent himself from crying out at the
false position into which he had dragged her; and yet there was
something so admirably sincere in the King's words, something so
courteous and manly, that it robbed his words of all the theatrical
effect they held, and his tribute to the girl filled even Gordon with
an emotion which on the part of the young nobles found expression in
cheer upon cheer.

Gordon recalled these cheers and the looks of wondering admiration
which had been turned upon Miss Carson, and he grew so hot at the
recollection that he struck the wall beside him savagely with his
clinched fist, and damned the obstinacy of his young and beautiful
friend with a sincerity and vigor that was the highest expression of
his interest in her behalf.

He threw his cigar into the rampart at his feet and dropped back into
the high road.  It was deserted at the time, except for the presence of
a tall, slightly built stranger, who advanced toward him from the city
gates.  The man was dressed in garments of European fashion and carried
himself like a soldier, and Gordon put him down at a glance as one of
the volunteers from Paris.  The stranger was walking leisurely,
stopping to gaze at the feluccas in the bay, and then turning to look
up at the fortress on the hill.  He seemed to have no purpose in his
walk except the interest of a tourist, and as he drew up even with
Gordon he raised his helmet politely and, greeting him in English,
asked if he were on the right road to the Bashaw's Palace.  Gordon
pointed to where the white walls of the palace rose above the other
white walls about it.

"That is it," he said.  "All the roads lead to it.  You keep going up
hill."

"Thank you," said the stranger.  "I see I have taken a long way."  He
put his white umbrella in the sand, and, removing his helmet, mopped
his forehead with his handkerchief.  "It is a curious old town,
Tangier," he said, affably, "but too many hills, is it not so?  Algiers
I like better.  There is more life."

"Yes, Algiers is almost as good as the boulevards," Gordon assented,
"if you like the boulevards.  I prefer this place because it is
unspoiled.  But, as you say, there is not much to do here."

The stranger's eyes fell upon the Hotel Grande Bretagne, which stood a
quarter of a mile away from them on the beach.

"That is the Hotel Bretagne, is it not?" he asked.  Gordon answered him
with a nod.

"The King Louis of Messina, so the chasseur at the hotel tells me, is
stopping there en suite," the stranger added, with an interrogative air
of one who volunteers an interesting fact, and who asks if it is true
at the same moment.

"I can't say, I'm sure," Gordon replied.  "I only arrived here
yesterday."

The stranger bowed his head in recognition of this piece of personal
information, and, putting on his helmet, picked up his umbrella as
though to continue his stroll.  As he did so his eyes wandered over the
harbor and were arrested with apparent interest by the yacht, which lay
a conspicuous object on the blue water.  He pointed at it with his
umbrella.

"One of your English men-of-war is in the harbor, I see.  She is very
pretty, but not large; not so large as many," he said.

Gordon turned his head obligingly and gazed at the yacht with polite
interest.  "Is that a man-of-war?  I thought it was a yacht," he said.
"I'm not familiar with the English war-vessels.  I am an American."

"Ah, indeed!" commented the affable stranger.  "I am French myself, but
I think she is a man-of-war.  I saw her guns when I passed on the
steamer from Gibraltar."

Gordon knew that the steamer did not pass within half a mile of where
the yacht lay at anchor, but he considered it might be possible to see
her decks with the aid of a glass.

"You may be right," he answered, indifferently.  As he turned his eyes
from the boat he saw a woman, dressed in white, and carrying a parasol,
leave the gardens of the Hotel Bretagne, and come toward them along the
beach.  The Frenchman, following the direction of his eyes, saw her
also, and regarded her instantly with such evident concern that Gordon,
who had recognized her even at that distance as the Countess Zara, felt
assured that his inquisitor held, as he had already suspected, more
than a tourist's interest in Tangier.

"Well, I will wish you a good-morning," said the Frenchman, hurriedly.

"Good-morning," Gordon replied, and taking a cigar from his case, he
seated himself again upon the rampart.  As he walked away the stranger
glanced back over his shoulder, but Gordon was apparently absorbed in
watching the waves below him, and had lost all interest in his chance
acquaintance.  But he watched both the woman and the Frenchman as they
advanced slowly from opposite directions and drew nearer together, and
he was not altogether surprised, when the in man was within twenty feet
of her, to see her start and stand still, and then, with the indecision
of a hunted animal, move uncertainly, and then turn and run in the
direction of the hotel.  Something the man apparently called after her
caused her to stop, and Gordon observed them now with undisguised
interest as they stood conversing together, oblivious of the
conspicuous mark they made on the broad white beach under the brilliant
sun.

"I wonder what he's up to now?" Gordon mused.  "He was trying to pump
me, that's evident, and he certainly recognized the lady, and she
apparently did not want to recognize him.  I wonder if he is a rejected
lover, or another conspirator.  This is a most amusing place, nothing
but plots and counterplots and--Hello!" he exclaimed aloud.  The man
had moved quickly past Madame Zara, and had started toward the hotel,
and Zara had held out her hand to him, as though to entreat him to
remain.  But he did not stop, and she had taken a few uncertain steps
after him, and had then, much to the American's dismay, fallen limply
on her back on the soft sand.  She was not a hundred yards distant from
where he sat, and in an instant he had slipped from the wall, and
dropped on his hands and knees on the beach below.  When Gordon reached
her the Frenchman had returned, and was supporting her head on his knee
and covering her head with her parasol.

"The lady has fainted!" he exclaimed, eagerly.  His manner was no
longer one of idle indolence.  He was wide awake now and visibly
excited.

"The sun has been too much for her," he said.  "It is most dangerous
walking about at this time of day."

Gordon ran down the beach and scooped up some water in his helmet, and
dipping his handkerchief in it bathed her temples and cheek.  He had
time to note that she was a very beautiful girl, and the pallor of her
face gave it a touch of gentleness that he had not seen there before.

"I will go to the hotel and bring assistance, said the stranger,
uneasily, as the woman showed signs of regaining consciousness.

"No," said Gordon, "you'll stay where you are and shade her with her
umbrella.  She'll be all right in a minute."

The girl opened her eyes, and looking up saw Gordon bending over her.
She regarded him for a moment and made an effort to rise, and in her
endeavor to do so her eyes met those of the Frenchman, and with a sharp
moan she shut them again and threw herself from Gordon's knee to the
sand.

"Give me that umbrella," said Gordon, "and go stand over there out of
the way."

The man rose from his knee without showing any resentment and walked
some little distance away, where he stood with his arms folded, looking
out to sea.  He seemed much too occupied with something of personal
interest to concern himself with a woman's fainting-spell.  The girl
lifted herself slowly to her elbow, and then, before Gordon could
assist her, rose with a quick, graceful movement and stood erect upon
her feet.  She placed a detaining hand for an instant on the American's
arm.

"Thank you very much," she said.  "I am afraid I have been imprudent in
going out into the sun."  Her eyes were fixed upon the Frenchman, who
stood moodily staring at the sea and tearing one of his finger-nails
with his teeth.  He seemed utterly oblivious of their presence.  The
girl held out her hand for the parasol she had dropped and took it from
Gordon with a bow.

"May I walk back with you to your hotel?" he asked.  "Unless this
gentleman----"

"Thank you," the girl said, in tones which the Frenchman could have
easily overheard had he been listening.  "I am quite able to go alone
now; it is only a step."

She was still regarding the Frenchman closely; but as he was obviously
unconscious of them she moved so that Gordon hid her from him, and in
an entirely different voice she said, speaking rapidly,--

"You are Mr. Gordon, the American who joined us last night.  That man
is a spy from Messina.  He is Renauld, the Commander-in-Chief of their
army.  He must be gotten away from here at once.  It is a matter for a
man to attend to.  Will you do it?"

"How do you know this?" Gordon asked.  "How do you know he is General
Renauld?  I want to be certain."

The girl tossed her head impatiently.

"He was pointed out to me at Messina.  I saw him there in command at a
review.  He has just spoken to me--that was what frightened me into
that fainting-spell.  I didn't think I was so weak," she said, shaking
her head.  "He offered me a bribe to inform him of our plans.  I tell
you he is a spy."

"That's all right," said Gordon, reassuringly; "you go back to the
hotel now and send those guards here on a run.  I'll make a charge
against him and have him locked up until after we sail to-night.
Hurry, please; I'll stay here."

Gordon felt a pleasurable glow of excitement.  It was his nature to
throw himself into everything he did and to at once become a partisan.
It was a quality which made his writings attractive to the reader, and
an object of concern to his editor.  At the very word "spy," and at
this first hint of opposition to the cause in which he had but just
enlisted, he thrilled as though it had always been his own, and he
regarded the Frenchman with a personal dislike as sudden as it was
unfounded.

The Frenchman had turned and was walking in the direction of the city
gate.  His eyes were bent on the sandy beach which stretched before
him, and he made his way utterly unmindful of the waves that stole up
to his feet and left little pools of water in his path.  Gordon
beckoned impatiently to the two soldiers who came running toward him at
the hotel, and moved forward to meet them the sooner.  He took one of
them by the wrist and pointed with his other hand at the retreating
figure of the Frenchman.

"That man," he said, "is one of the King's enemies.  The King is in
danger while that man is here.  Your duty is to protect the King, so he
gives this foreigner into your charge."

The soldier nodded his head in assent.  "The King himself sent us," he
replied.

"You will place him in the Civil Prison," Gordon continued, "until the
King is safe on his yacht, and you will not allow him to send for the
French Consul-General.  If he sees the Consul-General he will tell him
a great many lies about you, and a great war-ship will come and your
Bashaw will be forced to pay the foreigners much money.  I will go with
you and tell this man in his own tongue what you are going to do with
him."

They walked hurriedly after the Frenchman, and when they had overtaken
him Gordon halted and bowed.

"One moment, please," he said.  "These soldiers have an order for your
arrest.  I speak the language, and if you have anything to say to them
I will interpret for you."

The Frenchman stared from Gordon to the guards and then laughed
incredulously but with no great confidence.  He had much to say, but he
demanded to know first why he should be arrested.

"The lady you insulted," Gordon answered, gravely, "happened,
unfortunately for you, to be one of the King's guests.  She has
complained to him, and he has sent these soldiers to put you where you
cannot trouble her again.  You see, sir, you cannot annoy women with
impunity even in this barbarous country."

"Insult her!  I did not insult her," the man retorted.  "That is not
the reason I am arrested."

"You annoyed her so much that she fainted.  I saw you," said Gordon,
backing away with the evident purpose of abandoning the foreigner to
his guards.

"She has lied," the man cried, "either to the King or to me.  I do not
know which, but I am here to find out.  That is why I came to Tangier,
and I intend to learn the truth."

"You've begun rather badly," Gordon answered, as he still retreated.
"In the Civil Prison your field of investigation will be limited."

The Frenchman took a hasty step toward him, shrugging off the hand one
of the soldiers had placed on his shoulder.

"Are you the Prince Kalonay, sir?" he demanded.  "But surely not," he
added.

"No, I am not the Prince," Gordon answered.  "I bid you good-morning,
sir."

"Then you are on the other side," the man called after him eagerly,
with a tone of great relief.  "I have been right from the very first.
I see it plainly.  It is a double plot, and you are one of that woman's
dupes.  Listen to me--I beg of you, listen to me--I have a story to
tell."

Gordon paused and looked back at the man over his shoulder, doubtfully.

"It's like the Arabian Nights," he said, with a puzzled smile.  "There
was once a rich merchant of Bagdad and the Sultan was going to execute
him, but they put off the execution until he could tell them the story
of the Beautiful Countess and the French Envoy.  I am sorry," he added,
shaking his head, "but I cannot listen now.  I must not be seen talking
to you at all, and everyone can see us here."

They were as conspicuous figures on the flat surface of the beach as
two palms in a desert, and Gordon was most anxious to escape, for he
was conscious that he could be observed from every point in the town.
A hundred yards away, on the terrace of the hotel, he saw the King,
Madame Zara, Barrat, and Erhaupt standing together watching them.

"If the American leaves him now, we are safe," the King was saying.  He
spoke in a whisper, as though he feared that even at that distance
Gordon and the Frenchman could overhear his words.  "But if he remains
with him he will find out the truth, and that means ruin.  He will ruin
us."

"Look, he is coming this way," Zara answered.  "He is leaving him.  The
danger is past."

The Frenchman raised his eyes and saw the four figures grouped closely
together on the terrace.

"See, what did I tell you?" he cried.  "She is with the King now.  It
is a plot within a plot, and I believe you know it," he added,
furiously.  "You are one of these brave blackmailers yourself--that is
why you will not let me speak."

"Blackmailers!"  said  Gordon.  "Confound your impudence, what the
devil do you mean by that?"

But the Frenchman was staring angrily at the distant group on the
terrace, and Gordon turned his eyes in the same direction.  Something
he saw in the strained and eager attitude of the four conspirators
moved him to a sudden determination.

"That will do, you must go," he commanded, pointing with his arm toward
the city gate; and before the Frenchman could reply, he gave an order
to the guards, and they seized the foreigner roughly by either arm and
hurried him away.

"Thank God!" exclaimed the King, piously.  "They have separated, and
the boy thinks he is rendering us great service.  Well, and so he is,
the young fool."

The group on the piazza remained motionless, watching Gordon as he
leisurely lit a cigar and stood looking out at the harbor until the
Frenchman had disappeared inside the city wall.  Then he turned and
walked slowly after him.

"I do not like that.  I do not like his following him," said Barrat,
suspiciously.

"That is nothing," answered the King.  "He is going to play the spy and
see that the man is safely in jail.  Then he will return and report to
us.  We must congratulate him warmly.  He follows at a discreet
distance, you observe, and keeps himself well out of sight.  The boy
knows better than to compromise himself by being seen in conversation
with the man.  Of course, if Renauld is set free we must say we had no
part in his arrest, that the American made the arrest on his own
authority.  What a convenient tool the young man is.  Why, his coming
really frightened us at first, and now--now we make a cat's-paw of
him." The King laughed merrily.  "We undervalue ourselves sometimes, do
we not?"

"He is a nice boy," said Zara.  "I feel rather sorry for him.  He
looked so anxious and distressed when I was so silly as to faint on the
beach just now.  He handled me as tenderly as a woman would have
done--not that women have generally handled me tenderly," she added.

"I was thinking the simile was rather misplaced," said the King.


Gordon passed the city wall and heard the gates swing to behind him.
The Frenchman and his two captors were just ahead, toiling heavily up
the steep and narrow street.  Gordon threw his cigar from him and ran
leaping over the huge cobbles to the Frenchman's side and touched him
on the shoulder.

"We are out of sight of the hotel, now, General," he said.  He pointed
to the dark, cool recesses of a coffee-shop and held back the rug that
hung before it.  "Come in here," he said, "and tell me that story."




IV

Baron Barrat was suspicious by education--his experience of life and
his own conduct had tended to render him so; and accordingly when,
three hours after he had seen Gordon apparently commit the French
officer to jail, he found them leaving a cafe in the most friendly and
amicable spirit, he wasted no time in investigation, but hurried at
once to warn the King.

"What we feared would happen, has happened," he said.  "The Frenchman
has told Gordon that Zara and Kalonay sold the secret of the
expedition, and Gordon will be coming here to warn you of it.  Now,
what are you going to do?  We must act quickly."

"I shall refuse to believe the Frenchman, of course," said the King.
"I shall ask Zara in his presence to answer his charges, and she will
tell him he lies.  That is all there will be of it.  What does it
matter what he says?  We sail at midnight.  We can keep him quiet until
then."

"If he is troublesome I can call for help from this room, and the
servants of the hotel and the guards will rush in and find us
struggling together.  We will charge him with an attempt at
assassination, and this time he surely will go to jail.  By to-morrow
morning we shall be many miles at sea."

"But he can cable to Messina, by way of Gibraltar, and head us off,"
objected Barrat.

"What can he cable?" demanded the King.  "Nothing the people of the
Republic do not already know.  It is our friends here that must not
find us out.  That is the main thing.  Thank Heaven!" he exclaimed,
"Kalonay and Paul are out of the way, and those crazy boys from Paris.
We will settle it here among ourselves in five minutes."

"And the American?" asked Zara.  "He knows, he will come with him.
Suppose he believes, suppose he believes that Kalonay and I have sold
you out, but suspects that you know it?"

"The American can go to the devil," said the King.  "Confound him and
his insolence.  I'll have him in the prison too, if he interferes.  Or
Erhaupt can pick a quarrel with him here and fight it out behind the
sand-hills before the others get back from their picnic.  He has done
as much for me before."

Zara stood up.  She was trembling slightly, and she glanced fearfully
from Erhaupt to the King.

"You will not do that," she said.

"And why not, madame?" demanded Louis.

"Because it will be murder," Zara whispered.  "He will murder him as he
did that boy in the Park at Pesth."

"What does the woman mean?" growled the German.  "Is she mad?  Send her
to her room, Louis."

"You know what I mean," Zara answered, her voice rising, in her
excitement.  "You fired before they gave the word.  I know you did.
Oh, Louis," she cried, "you never warned me it might come to this.  I
am afraid.  I am afraid to meet that man----"

She gave a sudden cry.  "And Kalonay!"  She held out her hands
appealingly.  "Indeed," she cried, "do not let Kalonay question me."

"Silence!" commanded the King.  "You are acting like a fool." He
advanced toward her, and clasped her wrist firmly in his hand.  "No
nerves, now," he said.  "I'll not have it.  You shall meet Kalonay, and
you shall swear that he is in the plot against me.  If you fail us now,
we are ruined.  As it is, we are sure to lose the bribe from the
Republic, but we may still get Miss Carson's money if you play your
part.  It is your word and the word of the Frenchman against Kalonay's.
And we have the paper signed by you for Kalonay as evidence.  Have you
got it with you?"

Zara bowed her head.  "It is always with me," she answered.

"Good," said the King.  "It will be a difficult chance, but if you
stand to your story, and we pretend to believe you, the others may
believe you, too."

"But I cannot," Zara cried.  "I know I cannot.  I tell you if you put
me face to face with Kalonay, I shall fail you.  I shall break down.
They will see that I am lying.  Send me away.  Send me away before they
come.  Tell them I saw the Frenchman, and suspected I had been found
out, and that I have gone away.  Tell them you don't know where I am."

"I believe she's right," Erhaupt said.  "She will do us more harm than
good.  Let her go to her room and wait there."

"She will remain where she is," said the King, sternly.  "And she will
keep her courage and her wits about her, or----"

He was interrupted by an exclamation from Barrat.  "Whatever you mean
to do, you must do it at once," he said, grimly.  He was standing at
the window which overlooked the beach.  "Here they come now," he
continued.  "The American has taken no chances, he is bringing an
audience with him."

The King and Erhaupt ran to the window, and peered over Barrat's
shoulder.

Advancing toward them along the beach, some on foot, and some on
horseback, were all the members of the expedition, those who had been
of the riding-party and those who had remained in Tangier.  Gordon and
the Frenchman Renauld were far in the lead, walking by themselves and
speaking earnestly together; Father Paul was walking with Mrs. Carson
and her daughter, and Kalonay was riding with two of the volunteers,
the Count de Rouen and Prince Henri of Poitiers.

When the King and Erhaupt turned from the window the Countess Zara had
disappeared.  "It is better so," said Erhaupt; "she was so badly
frightened she would have told the truth."

The King stood leaning on the back of a large arm-chair.  "Well, the
moment has come, it is our last chance," he said.  "Send for the Crown
Prince, Baron.  I shall be discovered in the act of taking a tender
farewell of my son."

Barrat made an eager gesture of dissent.

"I would not do that," he cried.  "If we are to make charges against
the jackal do not have the boy present; the boy must not hear them.
You know how Kalonay worships the child, and it would enrage him more
to be exposed before the Prince than before all the rest of the world.
He will be hard enough to handle without that.  Don't try him too far."

"You are absurd, Barrat," exclaimed the King.  "The boy won't
understand what is said."

"No, but the Jackal will," Barrat returned.  "You don't understand him,
Louis, he is like a woman; he has sentiment and feelings, and when we
all turn on him he will act like a madman.  Keep the boy out of his
sight, I tell you.  It's the only thing he cares for in the world.  He
has been a better father to him than you ever have been."

"That was quite natural; that was because it was his duty," said the
King, calmly.  "A Kalonay has always been the protector and tutor of
the heir-apparent.  If this one chooses to give his heart with his
service, that is not my concern.  Why, confound them, they all think
more of the child than they do of me.  That is why I need him by me
now."

Barrat shook his head.  "I tell you it will make trouble," he
persisted.  "Kalonay will not stand it. He and the child are more like
comrades than a tutor and his pupil.  Why, Kalonay would rather sit
with the boy in the Champs-Elysees and point out the people as they go
by than drive at the side of the prettiest woman in Paris.  He always
treats him as though he saw the invisible crown upon his head; he will
throw over any of us to stay in the nursery and play tin soldiers with
him.  And when he was ill--" Barrat nodded his head significantly.
"You remember."

"That will do," said the King.  "We have no time to consider the finer
feelings of the jackal; he is to be sacrificed, and that is all there
is of it.  The presence of the child may make him more unmanageable,
but it will certainly make it easier for me.  So go, bring the boy here
as I bid you."

Barrat left the room and returned immediately, followed by the Crown
Prince and his nurse.  The Prince was a dark, handsome little fellow of
four years.  His mother had died when he was born, and he had never
played with children of his own age, and his face was absurdly wise and
wistful; but it lighted with a sweet and grateful smile when anyone
showed him kindness or sought to arouse his interest.  To the Crown
Prince Kalonay was an awful and wonderful being.  He was the one person
who could make him laugh out of pure happiness and for no reason, as a
child should laugh.  And people who had seen them together asked which
of the princes was the older of the two.  When the child entered the
room, clinging to Barrat's finger, he carried in his other hand a
wooden spade and bucket, still damp with sand, and he was dressed in a
shabby blue sailor suit which left his little legs bare, and exposed
the scratches and bruises of many falls.  A few moments later, when the
conspirators entered the King's salon, preceded by Erhaupt, they found
the boy standing by his father's knee.  The King had his hand upon the
child's head, and had been interrupted apparently in a discourse on the
dignity of kingship, for the royal crown of Messina had been brought
out and stood beside him on the table, and his other hand rested on it
reverently.  It was an effective tableau, and the visitors observed it
with varying emotions, but with silence.

The King rose, taking his son's hand in his, and bowed, looking
inquiringly from Barrat to the Prince Kalonay.

"To what do I owe the pleasure of this visit?" he asked.  "Was it
discreet of you to come together in this way?  But you are most
welcome.  Place chairs for the ladies, Barrat."

Kalonay glanced at the others, and they nodded to him as though to make
him their spokesman.  He pointed at Gordon with his cap.

"We are here on the invitation of this gentleman, your Majesty," he
said.  "He took it upon himself to send after those of us who had gone
into the country, and came in person for the others who remained in
town.  He tells us he has news of the greatest importance to
communicate, which he cannot disclose except to you, and in the
presence of all of those who are to take part in the expedition.  We
decided to accompany him here, as he asked us, and to leave it to your
Majesty to say whether or not you wished us to remain." Kalonay smiled
in apology at the King, and the King answered him with a smile.

"The procedure is perhaps unconventional," the King said, "but in
America they move quickly.  No doubt our young companion has acted as
he thought was for the best.  If he has taken a liberty, the nature of
his news will probably excuse him.  Perhaps, Mr. Gordon," he added,
turning to the American, "you had better first tell me what this
discovery is, and I will decide whether it is best to discuss it in
open council."

Gordon did not appear to be the least disturbed by the criticism
Kalonay and the King had passed upon his conduct.  He only smiled
pleasantly when the King had finished speaking, and showed no
inclination to accept a private audience.

"What I have to say, your Majesty," he began, "is this.  I have learned
that all the secrets of your expedition have been sold to the Republic
of Messina.  One of those now present in this room is charged with
having sold them.  Shall I go on," he asked, "or do you still think it
advisable for anyone to leave the room?"

He paused and glanced from the King to the double row of conspirators,
who were standing together in a close semicircle facing the King and
himself.  The instant he ceased speaking there rose from their ranks an
outburst of consternation, of anger, and of indignant denial.  The
King's spirits rose within him at the sound, although he frowned and
made a gesture as though to command silence.

"Mr. Gordon, this is a serious charge you make," he said, smiling
grimly.  "One that may cost you a great deal--it might cost you your
life perhaps."  He paused significantly, and there was a second
outburst, this time from the younger men, which came so suddenly that
it was as though Louis had played upon certain chords on a keyboard,
and the sounds he wanted had answered to his touch.

"Pardon me, that is not the question," said Gordon.  "That I make
charges or run risks in making charges is not important.  That your
expedition has failed before it has even started is, however, of great
importance, at least so it sees to me."

There was a movement in the circle, and Father Paul pushed his way
forward from his place beside Miss Carson's chair.  He was so greatly
moved that when he spoke his voice was harsh and broken.  "What is your
authority for saying we have failed?" he demanded.

Gordon bowed gravely and turned and pointed to the Frenchman.  "This
gentleman," he said, "is General Renauld, Commander-in-Chief of the
army of Messina.  He is my authority.  He knows all that you mean to
do.  If he knows it, it is likely, is it not, that his army and the
President of the Republic know it also, and that when we attempt to
land they will be waiting for us."

The King silenced the second outburst that followed this by rising and
holding up his hand.

"Silence!  I believe I can explain," he said.  He was smiling, and his
bearing was easy and so full of assurance that the exclamations and
whispers died away on the instant.  "I am afraid I see what has
happened," the King said.  "But there need be no cause for alarm.  This
gentleman is, as Mr. Gordon says, the Commander-in-Chief of the
Messinian army, and it is true he suspected that an armed force would
invade the island.  It is not strange that he should have suspected it,
and it needed no traitor to enlighten him.  The visit of Father Paul
and the Prince Kalonay in the yacht, and their speeches inciting the
people to rebellion, would have warned the government that an
expedition might soon follow.  The return of our yacht to this place
has no doubt been made known in Messina through the public press, and
General Renauld followed the yacht here to learn what he could of our
plans--of our intended movements.  He came here to spy on us, and as a
spy I ordered Mr. Gordon to arrest him this morning on any charge he
pleased, and to place him out of our way until after to-night, when we
should have sailed.  I chose Mr. Gordon to undertake this service
because he happened to speak the language of the country, and it was
necessary to deal directly with the local authorities without the
intervention of an outsider.  What has happened is only too evident.
The spy, who when he came here only suspected, now, as Mr. Gordon says,
knows the truth, and he could have learned it only from one person, to
whom he has no doubt paid a pretty price for the information."  The
King took a step forward and pointed with his hand at the American.  "I
gave that man into your keeping, sir," he cried, "but I had you
watched.  Instead of placing him in jail you took him to a cafe and
remained there with him for three hours, and from that cafe you came
directly here to this room.  If he knows the truth, he learned it in
that cafe, and he learned it from you!"  There was a ring of such
earnestness and sincerity in the King's speech, and he delivered it
with such indignation and bitter contempt that a shout of relief, of
approbation and conviction, went up from his hearers, and fell as
quickly on the words as the applause of an audience drowns out the last
note of a great burst of song.  Barrat, in the excess of his relief,
turned his back sharply on the King, glancing sideways at Erhaupt and
shaking his head in speechless admiration.

"He is wonderful, simply wonderful," Erhaupt muttered; "he would have
made a great actor or a great diplomat."

"He is wasted as a King," whispered Barrat.

There was a menacing movement on the part of the younger men toward
Gordon and General Renauld, which the King noted, but which he made no
effort to check.  Neither Gordon nor General Renauld gave any sign that
they observed it. The American was busily engaged in searching his
pockets, and from one of these he produced two pieces of paper, which
he held up above his head, so that those in the room might see them.

"One moment, please," he began, and then waited until the tumult in the
room had ceased.  "Again, I must point out to you," he said, in brisk,
business-like tones, "that we are digressing.  The important thing is
not who did, or did not, sell out the expedition, but that it is in
danger of failing altogether.  What his Majesty says is in part
correct.  I did not take this gentleman to jail; I did take him to a
cafe, and there he told me much more concerning the expedition than I
had learned from those directly interested.  His information, he told
me, had been sold to the Republic by one who visited the island and who
claimed to act for one other.  I appreciated the importance of what he
said, and I also guessed that my word and his unsupported might be
doubted, as you have just doubted it.  So I took the liberty of
verifying what General Renauld told me by cabling to the President of
Messina."

There was a shout of consternation at these words, but Gordon's manner
was so confident and the audacity of his admission so surprised his
hearers that they were silent again immediately, and waited, with
breathless interest, while Gordon unfolded one of the pieces of paper.

"This is a copy of the cablegram I sent the President," he said, "and
to which, with his permission, I signed General Renauld's name.  It is
as follows:--


The President.  The Palace, Messina.--They will not believe you are
fully informed.  Cable at once the exact hour when they will leave
Tangier, at what hour they expect to land, at what place they expect to
land, what sum you have promised to pay for this information, and the
names of those to whom it is to be paid.

RENAULD.


Gordon lowered the paper.  "Is that quite clear?" he asked.  "Do you
follow me? I have invited the enemy himself to inform you of your
plans, and to tell you who has betrayed them.  His answer, which was
received a half hour ago, removes all suspicion from any save those he
names.  General Renauld and myself cease to be of the least consequence
in the matter; we are only messengers.  It is the President of Messina
who will speak to you now.  If you still doubt that the secret of your
expedition is known to the President you will have to doubt him."

The King sprang quickly to his feet and struck the arm of his chair
sharply with his open hand.

"I shall not permit that message to be read," he said.  "If we have a
traitor here, he is a traitor against me.  And I shall deal with him as
I see fit, in private."

There was a murmur of disappointment and of disapproval even, and the
King again struck the arm of his chair for silence.  Kalonay advanced
toward him, shaking his head and holding out his hands in protest.

"Your Majesty, I beseech you," he began.  "This concerns us all," he
cried.  "It is too evident that we have been betrayed; but it is not
fair to any of us that we should all lie under suspicion, as we must
unless it is told who has been guilty of this infamy.  I beg your
Majesty to reconsider.  There is no one in this room who is not in our
secret, and whoever has betrayed us must be with us here and now.  I,
who have an interest second only to your own, ask that that cablegram
be read."

There was a murmur of approbation from the conspirators, and
exclamations of approval and entreaty.  Miss Carson, in her excitement,
had risen to her feet and was standing holding her mother's hand.  The
King glanced uncertainly at Kalonay, and then turned to Barrat and
Erhaupt as if in doubt.

Gordon's eyes were fixed for a moment on Kalonay with a strange and
puzzled expression.  Then he gave a short sigh of relief, and turning
quickly searched the faces of those around him.  What he saw seemed to
confirm him in his purpose, for he folded the paper and placed it in
his pocket.  "His Majesty is right," he said.  "I shall not read this."

Kalonay and Father Paul turned upon him angrily.  "You have no choice
in the matter, sir," Kalonay cried.  "It has passed entirely out of
your hands."

"I beg your Majesty that the cablegram be read," the priest demanded,
in a voice that held less the tone of a request than of a command.

"I shall not read it," persisted Gordon, "because the person chiefly
concerned is not present."


"That is all the more reason for reading it," said Kalonay.  "Your
Majesty must reconsider."

The King whispered to Barrat, and the others waited in silence that
expressed their interest more clearly than a chorus of questions would
have done.

"It shall be as you ask," the King said, at last.  "You may read the
message, Mr. Gordon."

Gordon opened the paper and looked at it for some seconds of time with
a grave and perplexed expression, and then, with a short breath, as one
who takes a plunge, read it aloud.  "This is it," he said.


To General Renauld.  Cable Office, Tangier.--They leave Tangier Tuesday
at midnight, they land at daybreak Thursday morning on the south beach
below the old breakwater.  The secret of the expedition was sold us for
three hundred thousand francs by the Countess Zara and the Prince
Kalonay.


Gordon stuck the paper in his pocket, and, crossing to Kalonay, held
out his hand, with a smile.  "I don't believe it, of course," he said;
"but you would have it."

Kalonay neither saw the gesture nor heard the words.  He was turning in
bewilderment from the King to Father Paul, and he laughed uncertainly.

"What nonsense is this?" he demanded.  "Whose sorry trick is this?  The
lie is not even ingenious."

General Renauld had not spoken since he had entered the room, but now
he advanced in front of Kalonay and faced him with a threatening
gesture.

"The President of Messina does not lie, sir," he said, sternly.  "I
myself saw the Countess Zara write out that paper, which I and others
signed, and in which we agreed to pay to her and to you the money you
asked for betraying your King."

Father Paul pressed his hand heavily on Kalonay's shoulder.  "Do not
answer him," he commanded.  Gordon had moved to Kalonay's other side,
and the three men had unconsciously assumed an attitude of defence, and
stood back to back in a little group facing the angry circle that
encompassed them.  The priest raised his arm to command a hearing.

"Where is Madame Zara?" he cried.

"Ah, where indeed?" echoed the King, sinking back into his chair.  "She
has fled.  It is all too evident now; she has betrayed us and she has
fled."

But on his words, as if in answer to the priest's summons, the curtains
that hid the door into the King's private room were pulled to one side,
and Madame Zara appeared between them, glancing fearfully at the
excited crowd before her.  As she stood hesitating on the threshold,
she swayed slightly and clutched the curtains for a moment as though
for support.  The priest advanced, and led her to the centre of the
room.  She held a folded paper in her hand, which she gave to him in
silence.

"You have heard what has passed?" he asked, with a toss of his head
toward the heavy curtains.  The woman raised her head and bowed.  The
priest unfolded the paper.

"Am I to read this?" he asked.  The woman bowed again.

There was silence in the room while the priest's eyes ran quickly over
the paper.  He crushed it in his hand.

"It is as General Renauld says," he exclaimed.  "In this the Republic
of Messina agrees to pay the Countess Zara and the Prince Kalonay three
hundred thousand francs, if the expedition is withdrawn after it has
made a pretence of landing on the shores of Messina."

He took a step forward.  "Madame Zara," he cried, in a tone of warning,
"do you pretend that the Prince Kalonay was your accomplice in this;
that he knew what you meant to do?"

Madame Zara once more bowed her head.

"No! You must speak," commanded the priest.  "Answer me!"

Zara hesitated, in evident distress, and glanced appealingly at the
King; but the expression on his face was one of grief and of
unrelenting virtue.  "I do," she said, at last, in a low voice.
"Kalonay did know.  He thought the revolution would not succeed; he
thought it would fail, and so--and so--and we needed money.  They made
me--I, O my God, I cannot--I cannot!" she cried, suddenly, sinking on
her knees and hiding her face with her hands.

Kalonay stepped toward her and lifted her gently to her feet; but when
she looked and saw who it was that held her, she gave a cry and pulled
herself free.  She staggered and would have fallen, had not Gordon
caught and held her by the arm.  The King rose from his chair and
pointed at the shrinking figure of the woman.

"Stand aside from her," he said, sternly.  "Why should we pity her,
what pity has she shown for us--for me?  She has robbed me of my
inheritance.  But let her go, she is a woman; we cannot punish her.
Her sins rest on her own head.  But you--you," he cried, turning
fiercely on Kalonay, his voice rising to a high and melancholy key,
"you whom I have heaped with honors, whom I have leaned upon as on the
arm of a brother, that you should have sold me for silver, that you
should have turned Judas!"

The crowd of volunteers, bewildered by the rapid succession of events,
and confused and rendered desperate by the failure of their expedition,
caught up the word, and pressing forward with a rush, surrounded
Kalonay in an angry circle, crying "Judas!" "Traitor!" and "Coward!"

Kalonay turned from side to side.  On some he smiled bitterly in
silence, and at others he broke out into swift and fierce
denunciations; but the men around him crowded closer and would not
permit him to be heard.  He had turned upon them, again challenging
them to listen, when there was an opening in the circle and the men
stepped back, and Miss Carson pushed her way among them and halted at
Kalonay's side.  She did not look at him, but at the men about him.
She was the only calm figure in the group, and her calmness at such a
crisis, and her youth, and the fineness and fearlessness of her beauty,
surprised them into a sudden quiet.  There was instantly a cry for
order, and the men stood curious and puzzled, watching to see what she
would do.

"Gentlemen," she said, in a clear, grave voice.  "Gentlemen," she
repeated, sharply, as a few murmurs still greeted her, "if you are
gentlemen, let this lady speak.  She has not finished."  She crossed
quickly and took the Countess Zara by the hand.  "Go on, madame," she
urged, gently.  "Do not be afraid.  You say they made you do it.  Who
made you do it?  You have told us a part of the truth.  Now tell us the
whole truth."  For a moment the girl seemed much the older of the two,
and as Zara glanced up at her fearfully, she smiled to reassure her,
and stroked the woman's hand with her own.  "Who made you do it?" she
repeated.  "Not the Prince Kalonay, surely.  You cannot hope to make us
believe that.  We trust him absolutely.  Who was it, then?"

The King sprang forward with an oath; his apathy and mock dignity had
fallen from him like a mask.  His face was mottled, and his vicious
little eyes flashed with fear and anger.  Erhaupt crowded close behind
him, crouching like a dog at his heels.

"She has lied enough already," the King cried.  "We will not listen to
her.  Take her away."

"Yes, let her go," shouted Erhaupt, with a laugh.  "If she had been a
decent woman----"

There was a quick parting in the group and the sound of a heavy blow as
Kalonay flung himself upon Erhaupt and struck him in the face, so that
he staggered and fell at length upon the floor.  Gordon stood over him,
his fingers twitching at his side.

"Stand up, you bully," he said, "and get out of this, before we throw
you out."

Zara's face had turned a pitiful crimson, but her eyes flashed and
burned with resolve and indignation.  She stood erect and menacing,
like an angry goddess, and more beautiful in her indignation than they
had ever seen her.

"Now, I shall tell them the truth," she said, sternly.  "That man," she
cried, pointing her finger at the King, "that man whom they call a
King--that man who would have sacrificed the only friend who serves him
unselfishly--is the man who sold your secret to the enemy.  It was he
who made me do it.  He sent me to Messina, and while the priest and the
Prince Kalonay were working in the south, I sold them to the government
at the capital.  Barrat knew it, Erhaupt knew it, the King himself
planned it--to get money.  He has robbed all of his own people; he had
meant to rob this young girl; and he is so mean and pitiful a creature
that to save himself he now tries to hide behind the skirts of a woman,
and to sacrifice her,--the woman who has given her soul to him.  And
for this--my God!" she cried, her voice rising in an accent of agony
and bitter contempt--"for this!"

There was a grim and momentous silence in the room while Zara turned,
and without waiting to learn what effect her words might have, made her
way swiftly through the crowd and passed on out of the room and on to
the terrace beyond.

The King crouched back in his chair like a common criminal in the dock,
glancing fearfully from under his lowered eyebrows at the faces about
him, and on none did he see the least question of doubt but that Zara
had at last spoken the truth.

"She lies," the King muttered, as though answering their unspoken
thoughts, "the woman lies."

There was no movement from the men about him.  Shame for him, and grief
and bitter disappointment for themselves, showed on the face of each.
From outside a sea-breeze caught up the sand of the beach and drove it
whispering against the high windows, and the beat of the waves upon the
shores filled out and marked the silence of the room.

The Prince Kalonay stepped from the circle and stood for a moment
before the King, regarding him with an expression of grief and bitter
irony.  The King's eyes rose insolently, and faltered, and sank.

"For many years, your Majesty," the Prince said, but so solemnly that
it was as though he were a judge upon the bench, or a priest speaking
across an open grave, "the Princes of my house have served the Kings of
yours.  In times of war they fought for the King in battle, they
beggared themselves for him in times of peace; our women sold their
jewels for the King, our men gave him their lives, and in all of these
centuries the story of their loyalty, of their devotion, has had but
one sequel, and has met with but one reward,--ingratitude and
selfishness and treachery.  You know how I have served you, Louis.  You
know that I gave up my fortune and my home to go into exile with you,
and I did that gladly.  But I did more than that.  I did more than any
king or any man has the right to expect of any other man.  I served
your idle purposes so well that you, yourself, called me your jackal,
the only title your Majesty has ever bestowed that was deserved.  There
is no low thing nor no base thing that I have not done for you.  To
serve your pleasures, to gain you money, I have sunken so low that all
the royal blood in Europe could not make me clean.  But there is a
limit to what a man may do for his King, and to the loyalty a King may
have the right to demand.  And to-day and here, with me, the story of
our devotion to your House ends, and you go your way and I go mine, and
the last of my race breaks his sword and throws it at your feet, and is
done with you and yours forever."

Even those in the room who held no sympathy in their hearts for the
sentiment that had inspired the young man, felt that at that moment and
in their hearing he had renounced what was to him his religion and his
faith, and on the faces of all was the expression of a deep pity and
concern.  Their own adventure, in the light of his grief and bitterness
of spirit, seemed selfish and little, and they stood motionless, in an
awed and sorrowful silence.

The tense strain of the moment was broken suddenly by the advent on the
scene of an actor who had, in the rush of events, been neglected and
forgotten.  The little Crown Prince had stood clinging to his nurse's
skirts, an uncomprehending spectator of what was going forward.  But he
now advanced slowly, feeling that the silence invited him to claim his
father's notice.  He halted beside the chair in which Louis sat, his
head bent on his hands, and made an effort to draw himself up to his
father's knee.

But the King pushed him down, and hid his face from him.  The child
turned irresolutely, with a troubled countenance, and, looking up, saw
that the attention of all was fixed upon him.  At this discovery a
sudden flood of shyness overtook him, and he retreated hastily until
his eyes fell on the Prince Kalonay, standing alone, with his own eyes
turned resolutely away.  There was a breathless hush in the room as the
child, with a happy sigh, ran to his former friend and comrade, and
reached up both his arms.  The tableau was a familiar one to those who
knew them, and meant only that the child asked to be lifted up and
swung to the man's shoulder; but following as it did on what had just
passed, the gesture and the attitude carried with them the significance
of an appeal.  Kalonay, as though with a great effort, lowered his eyes
to the upturned face of the child below him, but held himself back and
stood stiffly erect.  A sharp shake of the head, as though he argued
with himself, was the only sign he gave of the struggle that was going
on within him.

At this second repulse, the child's arms dropped to his side, his lips
quivered, and he stood, a lonely little figure, glancing up at the
circle of men about him, and struggling to press back the tears that
came creeping to his eyes.

Kalonay regarded him steadfastly for a brief moment, as though he saw
him as a stranger, searching his face with eyes as pitiful as the
child's own; and then, with a sudden, sharp cry, the Prince dropped on
his knee and caught the child toward him, crushing him against his
heart, and burying his face on his shoulder.  There was a shout of
exultation from the nobles, and an uttered prayer from the priest, and
in a moment the young men had crowded in around them, struggling to be
the first to kiss the child's hands, and to ask pardon of the man who
held him in his arms.

"Gentlemen," Kalonay cried, his voice laughing through his tears, "we
shall still sail for the island of Messina.  They shall not say of us
that we visited the sins of the father on a child.  I was weak, my
friends, and I was credulous.  I thought I could break the tradition of
centuries.  But our instincts are stronger than our pride, and the
House I have always served I shall serve to the last."  He swung the
Crown Prince high upon his shoulder, and held his other arm above his
head.  "You will help me place this child upon his throne," he
commanded, and the room rang with cheers.  "You will appeal to his
people," he cried.  "Do you not think they will rise to this
standard-bearer, will they not rally to his call?  For he is a true
Prince, my comrades, who comes to them with no stain of wrong or
treachery, without a taint, as untarnished as the white snow that lies
summer and winter in the hollow of our hills, `and a child shall lead
us, and a child shall set them free.'  To the yacht!" he shouted.  "We
will sail at once, and while they wait for us to be betrayed into their
hands at the north, we shall be landing in the south, and thousands
will be hurrying to our standard."

His last words were lost in a tumult of cheers and cries, and the young
men poured out upon the terrace, running toward the shore, and filling
the soft night-air with shouts of "Long live the Prince Regent!"  "Long
live our King!"

As the room grew empty Kalonay crossed it swiftly and advancing to Miss
Carson took her hand.  His face was radiant with triumph and content.
He regarded her steadily for a moment, as though he could not find
words to tell his feelings.

"You had faith in me," he said, at last.  "Can I ever make you
understand how much that means to me?  When all had turned against me
you trusted me, you had faith in me, in the King's jackal."

"Silence; you must never say that again," the girl commanded, gently.
"You have shown it to be the lie it always was.  We shall call you the
Defender of the Faith now; you are the guardian of a King."  She smiled
at the little boy in his arms, and made a slight courtesy to them both.
"You have outgrown your old title," she said; "you have a proud one
now, you will be the Prince Regent."

Kalonay, with the child in his arms, and Miss Carson were standing
quite alone.  General Renauld had been led away, guarded by a merry
band of youngsters; the King still crouched in his chair, with Barrat
bowed behind him, but pulling, with philosophic calm, on a cigarette,
and Father Paul and Gordon were in close conversation with Mrs. Carson
at the farther end of the room.  The sun had set, and the apartment was
in semi-darkness.  Kalonay moved closer to Miss Carson and looked
boldly into her eyes, "There is a prouder title than that of the
Regent," he whispered; "will you ever give it me?"

The girl started, breathing quickly, and turned her head aside, making
an effort to free her hand, but Kalonay held it closer in his own.
"Will you give it me?" he begged.

Then the girl looked up at him smiling, but with such confidence and
love in her eyes that he read his answer, though she shook her head, as
though to belie the truth her eyes had told him.

"When you have done your work," she said, "come to me or send for me,
and I shall come and give you my answer; and whether you fail or
succeed the answer will be the same."

Kalonay stooped quickly and kissed her hand, and when he raised his
face his eyes were smiling with such happiness that the little child in
his arms read it there, and smiled too in sympathy, and pressed his
face closer against his comrade's shoulder.

Gordon at this moment moved across the room and bowed, making a deep
obeisance to the child.

"Might I be permitted," he asked, "to kiss his Royal Highness?  I
should like to boast of the fact, later," he explained.

The Crown Prince turned his sad, wise eyes on him in silence, and
gravely extended a little hand.

"You may kiss his Highness's hand," said Kalonay, smiling.

Gordon laughed and pressed the fingers in his own.

"When you talk like that, Kalonay," he said, "you make me feel like
Alice in the court-room with the Kings and Queens around her.  A dozen
times this afternoon I've felt like saying, `After all, they are only a
pack of cards.'"

Kalonay shook his head and glanced toward Miss Carson for enlightenment.

"I don't understand," he said.

"No, you couldn't be expected to," said Gordon; "You have not been
educated up to that.  It is the point of view."

He stuck out the middle finger of his hand, and drove it three times
deliberately into the side of the Crown Prince.  The child gasped and
stared open-mouthed at the friendly stranger, and then catching the
laugh in Gordon's eyes, laughed with him.

"Now," said Gordon, "I shall say that I have dug the King of Messina in
the ribs--that is even better than having kissed him.  God bless your
Royal Highness," he said, bowing gravely.  "You may find me
disrespectful at times," he added; "but then, you must remember, I am
going to risk a valuable life for you.  At least it's an extremely
valuable one to me."

Kalonay looked at Gordon for a moment with serious consideration, and
then held out his hand.  "You also had faith in me," he said.  "I thank
you.  Are you in earnest; do you really wish to serve us?"

"I mean to stay by you until the boy is crowned," said the American,
"unless we separate on our several paths of glory--where they will lead
depends, I imagine, on how we have lived."

"Or on how we die," Kalonay added.  "I am glad to hear you speak so.
If you wish, I shall attach you to the person of the Crown Prince.  You
shall be on the staff with the rank of Colonel."

Gordon made a low and sweeping bow.

"Rise, Sir Archibald Gordon," he said.  "I thank you," he added. "We
shall strive to please."

Miss Carson shook her head at him, and sighed in protest.

"Will you always take everything as a joke, Archie?" she said.

"My dear Patty," he answered, "the situation is much too serious to
take in any other way."

They moved to the door, and there the priest and Mrs. Carson joined
them; but on the threshold Kalonay stopped and looked for the first
time since he had addressed him at the King.

He regarded him for some seconds sternly in silence, and then pointed,
with his free hand, at the crown of Messina, which still rested on the
table at the King's elbow.  "Colonel Gordon," he said, in a tone of
assured authority, "I give the crown of Messina into your keeping.  You
will convey it, with all proper regard for its dignity, safely on board
the yacht, and then bring it at once to me."

When he had finished speaking the Prince turned and, without looking at
the King, passed on with the others across the terrace and disappeared
in the direction of the shore, where the launch lay waiting.

Gordon crossed the room and picked up the crown from the table, lifting
it with both hands, the King and Barrat watching him in silence as he
did so.  He hesitated, and held it for a moment, regarding it with much
the same expression of awe and amusement that a man shows when he is
permitted to hold a strange baby in his arms.  Turning, he saw the
sinister eyes of the King and of Barrat fastened upon him, and he
smiled awkwardly, and in some embarrassment turned the crown about in
his hands, so that the jewels in its circle gleamed dully in the dim
light of the room.  Gordon raised the crown and balanced it on his
finger-tips, regarding it severely and shaking his head.

"There are very few of these left in the world now, your Majesty," he
said, cheerfully, "and the number is getting smaller every year.  We
have none at all in my country, and I should think--seeing they are so
few--that those who have them would take better care of them, and try
to keep them untarnished, and brushed up, and clean."  He turned his
head and looked inquiringly at the King, but Louis made no sign that he
heard him.

"I have no desire, you understand me," continued Gordon, unabashed, "to
take advantage of a man when he is down, but the temptation to say `I
told you so' seems almost impossible to resist.  What?" he asked--"I
beg your pardon, I thought you spoke."  But the King continued
scornfully silent, and only a contemptuous snort from Barrat expressed
his feelings.

Gordon placed the crown carefully under his arm, and then removed it
quickly, with a guilty look of dismay at its former owner, and let it
swing from his hand; but this fashion of carrying it seemed also
lacking in respect, so he held it up again with both hands and glanced
at the King in some perplexity.

"There ought to be a sofa-cushion to go with this, or something to
carry it on," he said, in a grieved tone.  "You see, I am new at this
sort of thing.  Perhaps your Majesty would kindly give me some expert
information.  How do you generally carry it?"

The King's eyes snapped open and shut again.

"On my head," he said, grimly.

Gordon laughed in great relief.

"Now, do you know, I like that," he cried.  "That shows spirit.  I am
glad to see you take it so cheerfully.  Well, I must be going, sir," he
added, nodding, and moving toward the door.  "Don't be discouraged.  As
someone says, `It's always morning somewhere,' and in my country
there's just as good men out of office as there are in it.  Good-night."

While the sound of Gordon's footsteps died away across the marble
terrace, the King and Barrat remained motionless and silent.  The
darkness in the room deepened and the silence seemed to deepen with it;
and still they remained immovable, two shadowy figures in the deserted
apartment where the denunciations of those who had abandoned them still
seemed to hang and echo in the darkness.  What thoughts passed through
their minds or for how long a time they might still have sat in bitter
contemplation can only be guessed, for they were surprised by the sharp
rattle of a lock, the two great doors of the adjoining room were thrown
wide open, and a broad and brilliant light flooded the apartment.
Niccolas, the King's majordomo, stood  between the doors, a black
silhouette against the glare of many candles.

"His Majesty is served!" he said.

The King lifted his head sharply, as though he found some lurking
mockery in the words, or some fresh affront; but in the obsequious bow
of his majordomo there was no mockery, and the table beyond glistened
with silver, while a pungent and convincing odor of rich food was
wafted insidiously through the open doors.

The King rose with a gentle sigh, and nodded to his companion.

"Come, Barrat," he said, taking the baron's arm in his.  "The rascals
have robbed us of our throne, but, thank God, they have had the grace
to leave me my appetite."






by

Richard Harding Davis




The Old Time Journalist will tell you that the best reporter is the one
who works his way up.  He holds that the only way to start is as a
printer's devil or as an office boy, to learn in time to set type, to
graduate from a compositor into a stenographer, and as a stenographer
take down speeches at public meetings, and so finally grow into a real
reporter, with a fire badge on your left suspender, and a speaking
acquaintance with all the greatest men in the city, not even excepting
Police Captains.

That is the old time journalist's idea of it.  That is the way he was
trained, and that is why at the age of sixty he is still a reporter.
If you train up a youth in this way, he will go into reporting with too
full a knowledge of the newspaper business, with no illusions
concerning it, and with no ignorant enthusiasms, but with a keen and
justifiable impression that he is not paid enough for what he does.
And he will only do what he is paid to do.

Now, you cannot pay a good reporter for what he does, because he does
not work for pay.  He works for his paper.  He gives his time, his
health, his brains, his sleeping hours, and his eating hours, and
sometimes his life, to get news for it.  He thinks the sun rises only
that men may have light by which to read it.  But if he has been in a
newspaper office from his youth up, he finds out before he becomes a
reporter that this is not so, and loses his real value.  He should come
right out of the University where he has been doing "campus notes" for
the college weekly, and be pitchforked out into city work without
knowing whether the Battery is at Harlem or Hunter's Point, and with
the idea that he is a Moulder of Public Opinion and that the Power of
the Press is greater than the Power of Money, and that the few lines he
writes are of more value in the Editor's eyes than is the column of
advertising on the last page, which they are not.

After three years--it is sometimes longer, sometimes not so long--he
finds out that he has given his nerves and his youth and his enthusiasm
in exchange for a general fund of miscellaneous knowledge, the
opportunity of personal encounter with all the greatest and most
remarkable men and events that have risen in those three years, and a
great fund of resource and patience.  He will find that he has crowded
the experiences of the lifetime of the ordinary young business man,
doctor, or lawyer, or man about town, into three short years; that he
has learned to think and to act quickly, to be patient and unmoved when
everyone else has lost his head, actually or figuratively speaking; to
write as fast as another man can talk, and to be able to talk with
authority on matters of which other men do not venture even to think
until they have read what he has written with a copy-boy at his elbow
on the night previous.

It is necessary for you to know this, that you may understand what
manner of man young Albert Gordon was.

Young Gordon had been a reporter just three years.  He had left Yale
when his last living relative died, and had taken the morning train for
New York, where they had promised him reportorial work on one of the
innumerable Greatest New York Dailies.  He arrived at the office at
noon, and was sent back over the same road on which he had just come,
to Spuyten Duyvil, where a train had been wrecked and everybody of
consequence to suburban New York killed.  One of the old reporters
hurried him to the office again with his "copy," and after he had
delivered that, he was sent to the Tombs to talk French to a man in
Murderers' Row, who could not talk anything else, but who had shown
some international skill in the use of a jimmy.  And at eight, he
covered a flower-show in Madison Square Garden; and at eleven was sent
over the Brooklyn Bridge in a cab to watch a fire and make guesses at
the losses to the insurance companies.

He went to bed at one, and dreamed of shattered locomotives, human
beings lying still with blankets over them, rows of cells, and banks of
beautiful flowers nodding their heads to the tunes of the brass band in
the gallery.  He decided when he awoke the next morning that he had
entered upon a picturesque and exciting career, and as one day followed
another, he became more and more convinced of it, and more and more
devoted to it.  He was twenty then, and he was now twenty-three, and in
that time had become a great reporter, and had been to Presidential
conventions in Chicago, revolutions in Hayti, Indian outbreaks on the
Plains, and midnight meetings of moonlighters in Tennessee, and had
seen what work earthquakes, floods, fire, and fever could do in great
cities, and had contradicted the President, and borrowed matches from
burglars.  And now he thought he would like to rest and breathe a bit,
and not to work again unless as a war correspondent.  The only obstacle
to his becoming a great war correspondent lay in the fact that there
was no war, and a war correspondent without a war is about as absurd an
individual as a general without an army.  He read the papers every
morning on the elevated trains for war clouds; but though there were
many war clouds, they always drifted apart, and peace smiled again.
This was very disappointing to young Gordon, and he became more and
more keenly discouraged.

And then as war work was out of the question, he decided to write his
novel.  It was to be a novel of New York life, and he wanted a quiet
place in which to work on it.  He was already making inquiries among
the suburban residents of his acquaintance for just such a quiet spot,
when he received an offer to go to the Island of Opeki in the North
Pacific Ocean, as secretary to the American consul at that place.  The
gentleman who had been appointed by the President to act as consul at
Opeki was Captain Leonard T. Travis, a veteran of the Civil War, who
had contracted a severe attack of rheumatism while camping out at night
in the dew, and who on account of this souvenir of his efforts to save
the Union had allowed the Union he had saved to support him in one
office or another ever since.  He had met young Gordon at a dinner, and
had had the presumption to ask him to serve as his secretary, and
Gordon, much to his surprise, had accepted his offer.  The idea of a
quiet life in the tropics with new and beautiful surroundings, and with
nothing to do and plenty of time in which to do it, and to write his
novel besides, seemed to Albert to be just what he wanted; and though
he did not know nor care much for his superior officer, he agreed to go
with him promptly, and proceeded to say good-by to his friends and to
make his preparations.  Captain Travis was so delighted with getting
such  a clever young gentleman for his secretary, that he referred to
him to his friends as "my attache of legation;" nor did he lessen that
gentleman's dignity by telling anyone that the attache's salary was to
be five hundred dollars a year.  His own salary was only fifteen
hundred dollars; and though his brother-in-law, Senator Rainsford,
tried his best to get the amount raised, he was unsuccessful.  The
consulship to Opeki was instituted early in the '50's, to get rid of
and reward a third or fourth cousin of the President's, whose services
during the campaign were important, but whose after-presence was
embarrassing.  He had been created consul to Opeki as being more
distant and unaccessible than any other known spot, and had lived and
died there; and so little was known of the island, and so difficult was
communication with it, that no one knew he was dead, until Captain
Travis, in his hungry haste for office, had uprooted the sad fact.
Captain Travis, as well as Albert, had a secondary reason for wishing
to visit Opeki.  His physician had told him to go to some warm climate
for his rheumatism, and in accepting the consulship his object was
rather to follow out his doctor's orders at his country's expense, than
to serve his country at the expense of his rheumatism.

Albert could learn but very little of Opeki; nothing, indeed, but that
it was situated about one hundred miles from the Island of Octavia,
which island, in turn, was simply described as a coaling-station three
hundred miles distant from the coast of California.  Steamers from San
Francisco to Yokohama stopped every third week at Octavia, and that was
all that either Captain Travis or his secretary could learn of their
new home.  This was so very little, that Albert stipulated to stay only
as long as he liked it, and to return to the States within a few months
if he found such a change of plan desirable.

As he was going to what was an almost undiscovered country, he thought
it would be advisable to furnish himself with a supply of articles with
which he might trade with the native Opekians, and for this purpose he
purchased a large quantity of brass rods, because he had read that
Stanley did so, and added to these, brass curtain-chains, and about two
hundred leaden medals similar to those sold by street pedlers during
the Constitutional Centennial celebration in New York City.

He also collected even more beautiful but less exensive decorations for
Christmas-trees, at a wholesale house on Park Row.  These he hoped to
exchange for furs or feathers or weapons, or for whatever other curious
and valuable trophies the Island of Opeki boasted.  He already pictured
his rooms on his return hung fantastically with crossed spears and
boomerangs, feather head-dresses, and ugly idols.

His friends told him that he was doing a very foolish thing, and argued
that once out of the newspaper world, it would be hard to regain his
place in it.  But he thought the novel that he would write while lost
to the world at Opeki would serve to make up for his temporary absence
from it, and he expressly and impressively stipulated that the editor
should wire him if there was a war.

Captain Travis and his secretary crossed the continent without
adventure, and took passage from San Francisco on the first steamer
that touched at Octavia.  They reached that island in three days, and
learned with some concern that there was no regular communication with
Opeki, and that it would be necessary to charter a sailboat for the
trip.  Two fishermen agreed to take them and their trunks, and to get
them to their destination within sixteen hours if the wind held good.
It was a most unpleasant sail.  The rain fell with calm, unrelentless
persistence from what was apparently a clear sky; the wind tossed the
waves as high as the mast and made Captain Travis ill; and as there was
no deck to the big boat, they were forced to huddle up under pieces of
canvas, and talked but little.  Captain Travis complained of frequent
twinges of rheumatism, and gazed forlornly over the gunwale at the
empty waste of water.

"If I've got to serve a term of imprisonment on a rock in the middle of
the ocean for four years," he said, "I might just as well have done
something first to deserve it.  This is a pretty way to treat a man who
bled for his country.  This is gratitude, this is." Albert pulled
heavily on his pipe, and wiped the rain and spray from his face and
smiled.

"Oh, it won't be so bad when we get there," he said; "they say these
Southern people are always hospitable, and the whites will be glad to
see anyone from the States."

"There will be a round of diplomatic dinners," said the consul, with an
attempt at cheerfulness.  "I have brought two uniforms to wear at them."

It was seven o'clock in the evening when the rain ceased, and one of
the black, half-naked fishermen nodded and pointed at a little low line
on the horizon.

"Opeki," he said.  The line grew in length until it proved to be an
island with great mountains rising to the clouds, and, as they drew
nearer and nearer, showed a level coast running back to the foot of the
mountains and covered with a forest of palms.  They next made out a
village of thatched huts around a grassy square, and at some distance
from the village a wooden structure with a tin roof.

"I wonder where the town is," asked the consul, with a nervous glance
at the fishermen.  One of them told him that what he saw was the town.

"That?" gasped the consul.  "Is that where all the people on the island
live?"

The fisherman nodded; but the other added that there were other natives
further back in the mountains, but that they were bad men who fought
and ate each other.  The consul and his attache of legation gazed at
the mountains with unspoken misgivings.  They were quite near now, and
could see an immense crowd of men and women, all of them black, and
clad but in the simplest garments, waiting to receive them.  They
seemed greatly excited and ran in and out of the huts, and up and down
the beach, as wildly as so many black ants.  But in the front of the
group they distinguished three men who they could see were white,
though they were clothed, like the others, simply in a shirt and a
short pair of trousers.  Two of these three suddenly sprang away on a
run and disappeared among the palm-trees; but the third one, when he
recognized the American flag in the halyards, threw his straw hat in
the water and began turning handsprings over the sand.

"That young gentleman, at least," said Albert, gravely, "seems pleased
to see us."

A dozen of the natives sprang into the water and came wading and
swimming toward them, grinning and shouting and swinging their arms.

"I don't think it's quite safe, do you?" said the consul, looking out
wildly to the open sea.  "You see, they don't know who I am."

A great black giant threw one arm over the gunwale and shouted
something that sounded as if it were spelt Owah, Owah, as the boat
carried him through the surf.

"How do you do?" said Gordon, doubtfully.  The boat shook the giant off
under the wave and beached itself so suddenly that the American consul
was thrown forward to his knees.  Gordon did not wait to pick him up,
but jumped out and shook hands with the young man who had turned
handsprings, while the natives gathered about them in a circle and
chatted and laughed in delighted excitement.

"I'm awfully glad to see you," said the young man, eagerly.  "My name's
Stedman.  I'm from New Haven, Connecticut.  Where are you from?"

"New York," said Albert.  "This," he added, pointing solemnly to
Captain Travis, who was still on his knees in the boat, "is the
American consul to Opeki."  The American consul to Opeki gave a wild
look at Mr. Stedman of New Haven and at the natives.

"See here, young man," he gasped, "is this all there is of Opeki?"

"The American consul?" said young Stedman, with a gasp of amazement,
and looking from Albert to Captain Travis.  "Why, I never supposed they
would send another here; the last one died about fifteen years ago, and
there hasn't been one since.  I've been living in the consul's office
with the Bradleys, but I'll move out, of course.  I'm sure I'm awfully
glad to see you.  It'll make it so much more pleasant for me."

"Yes," said Captain Travis, bitterly, as he lifted his rheumatic leg
over the boat; "that's why we came."

Mr. Stedman did not notice this.  He was too much pleased to be
anything but hospitable.  "You are soaking wet, aren't you?" he said;
"and hungry, I guess.  You come right over to the consul's office and
get on some other things."

He turned to the natives and gave some rapid orders in their language,
and some of them jumped into the boat at this, and began to lift out
the trunks, and others ran off toward a large, stout old native, who
was sitting gravely on a log, smoking, with the rain beating unnoticed
on his gray hair.

"They've gone to tell the King," said Stedman; "but you'd better get
something to eat first, and then I'll be happy to present you properly."

"The King," said Captain Travis, with some awe; "is there a king?"

"I never saw a king," Gordon remarked, "and I'm sure I never expected
to see one sitting on a log in the rain."

"He's a very good king," said Stedman, confidentially;  "and though you
mightn't think it to look at him, he's a terrible stickler for
etiquette and form.  After supper he'll give you an audience; and if
you have any tobacco, you had better give him some as a present, and
you'd better say it's from the President: he doesn't like to take
presents from common people, he's so proud.  The only reason he borrows
mine is because he thinks I'm the President's son."

"What makes him think that?" demanded the consul, with some shortness.
Young Mr. Stedman looked nervously at the consul and at Albert, and
said that he guessed someone must have told him.

The consul's office was divided into four rooms with an open court in
the middle, filled with palms, and watered somewhat unnecessarily by a
fountain.

"I made that," said Stedman, in a modest, offhand way.  "I made it out
of hollow bamboo reeds connected with a spring.  And now I'm making one
for the King.  He saw this and had a lot of bamboo sticks put up all
over the town, without any underground connections, and couldn't make
out why the water wouldn't spurt out of them.  And because mine spurts,
he thinks I'm a magician."

"I suppose," grumbled the consul, "someone told him that too."

"I suppose so," said Mr. Stedman, uneasily.

There was a veranda around the consul's office, and inside the walls
were hung with skins, and pictures from illustrated papers, and there
was a good deal of bamboo furniture, and four broad, cool-looking beds.
The place was as clean as a kitchen.  "I made the furniture," said
Stedman, "and the Bradleys keep the place in order."

"Who are the Bradleys?" asked Albert.

"The Bradleys are those two men you saw with me," said Stedman; "they
deserted from a British man-of-war that stopped here for coal, and they
act as my servants.  One is Bradley, Sr., and the other Bradley, Jr."

"Then vessels do stop here occasionally?" the consul said, with a
pleased smile.

"Well, not often," said Stedman.  "Not so very often; about once a
year.  The Nelson thought this was Octavia, and put off again as soon
as she found out her mistake, but the Bradleys took to the bush, and
the boat's crew couldn't find them.  When they saw your flag, they
thought you might mean to send them back, so they ran off to hide
again; they'll be back, though, when they get hungry."

The supper young Stedman spread for his guests, as he still treated
them, was very refreshing and very good.  There was cold fish and
pigeon-pie, and a hot omelet filled with mushrooms and olives and
tomatoes and onions all sliced up together, and strong black coffee.
After supper, Stedman went off to see the King, and came back in a
little while to say that his Majesty would give them an audience the
next day after breakfast.  "It is too dark now," Stedman explained;
"and it's raining so that they can't make the street-lamps burn.  Did
you happen to notice our lamps?  I invented them; but they don't work
very well yet.  I've got the right idea, though, and I'll soon have the
town illuminated all over, whether it rains or not."

The consul had been very silent and indifferent, during supper, to all
around him.  Now he looked up with some show of interest.

"How much longer is it going to rain, do you think?" he asked.

"Oh, I don't know," said Stedman, critically.  "Not more than two
months, I should say."  The consul rubbed his rheumatic leg and sighed,
but said nothing.

The Bradleys returned about ten o'clock, and came in very sheepishly.
The consul had gone off to pay the boatmen who had brought them, and
Albert in his absence assured the sailors that there was not the least
danger of their being sent away.  Then he turned into one of the beds,
and Stedman took one in another room, leaving the room he had occupied
heretofore for the consul.  As he was saying good-night, Albert
suggested that he had not yet told them how he came to be on a deserted
island; but Stedman only laughed and said that that was a long story,
and that he would tell him all about it in the morning.  So Albert went
off to bed without waiting for the consul to return, and fell asleep,
wondering at the strangeness of his new life, and assuring himself that
if the rain only kept up, he would have his novel finished in a month.

The sun was shining brightly when he awoke, and the palm-trees outside
were nodding gracefully in a warm breeze.  From the court came the odor
of strange flowers, and from the window he could see the ocean
brilliantly blue, and with the sun coloring the spray that beat against
the coral reefs on the shore.

"Well, the consul can't complain of this," he said, with a laugh of
satisfaction; and pulling on a bath-robe, he stepped into the next room
to awaken Captain Travis.  But the room was quite empty, and the bed
undisturbed.  The consul's trunk remained just where it had been placed
near the door, and on it lay a large sheet of foolscap, with writing on
it, and addressed at the top to Albert Gordon.  The handwriting was the
consul's.  Albert picked it up and read it with much anxiety.  It began
abruptly--


"The fishermen who brought us to this forsaken spot tell me that it
rains here six months in the year, and that this is the first month.  I
came here to serve my country, for which I fought and bled, but I did
not come here to die of rheumatism and pneumonia.  I can serve my
country better by staying alive; and whether it rains or not, I don't
like it.  I have been grossly deceived, and I am going back.  Indeed,
by the time you get this, I will be on my return trip, as I intend
leaving with the men who brought us here as soon as they can get the
sail up.  My cousin, Senator Rainsford, can fix it all right with the
President, and can have me recalled in proper form after I get back.
But of course it would not do for me to leave my post with no one to
take my place, and no one could be more ably fitted to do so than
yourself; so I feel no compunctions at leaving you behind.  I hereby,
therefore, accordingly appoint you my substitute with full power to
act, to collect all fees, sign all papers, and attend to all matters
pertaining to your office as American consul, and I trust you will
worthily uphold the name of that country and government which it has
always been my pleasure and duty to serve.

"Your sincere friend and superior officer,

"LEONARD T. TRAVIS.


"P. S. I did not care to disturb you by moving my trunk, so I left it,
and you can make what use you please of whatever it contains, as I
shall not want tropical garments where I am going.  What you will need
most, I think, is a waterproof and umbrella.

"P. S. Look out for that young man Stedman.  He is too inventive.  I
hope you will like your high office; but as for myself, I am satisfied
with little old New York.  Opeki is just a bit too far from
civilization to suit me."


Albert held the letter before him and read it over again before he
moved.  Then he jumped to the window.  The boat was gone, and there was
not a sign of it on the horizon.

"The miserable old hypocrite!" he cried, half angry and half laughing.
"If he thinks I am going to stay here alone he is very greatly
mistaken.  And yet, why not?" he asked.  He stopped soliloquizing and
looked around him, thinking rapidly.  As he stood there, Stedman came
in from the other room, fresh and smiling from his morning's bath.

"Good-morning," he said, "where's the consul?"

"The consul," said Albert, gravely, "is before you.  In me you see the
American consul to Opeki.

"Captain Travis," Albert explained, "has returned to the United States.
I suppose he feels that he can best serve his country by remaining on
the spot.  In case of another war, now, for instance, he would be there
to save it again."

"And what are you going to do?" asked Stedman, anxiously.  "You will
not run away too, will you?"

Albert said that he intended to remain where he was and perform his
consular duties, to appoint him his secretary, and to elevate the
United States in the opinion of the Opekians above all other nations.

"They may not think much of the United States in England," he said;
"but we are going to teach the people of Opeki that America is first on
the map and that there is no second."

"I'm sure it's very good of you to make me your secretary," said
Stedman, with some pride.  "I hope I won't make any mistakes.  What are
the duties of a consul's secretary?"

"That," said Albert, "I do not know.  But you are rather good at
inventing, so you can invent a few.  That should be your first duty and
you should attend to it at once.  I will have trouble enough finding
work for myself.  Your salary is five hundred dollars a year; and now,"
he continued, briskly, "we want to prepare for this reception.  We can
tell the King that Travis was just a guard of honor for the trip, and
that I have sent him back to tell the President of my safe arrival.
That will keep the President from getting anxious.  There is nothing,"
continued Albert, "like a uniform to impress people who live in the
tropics, and Travis, it so happens, has two in his trunk.  He intended
to wear them on State occasions, and as I inherit the trunk and all
that is in it, I intend to wear one of the uniforms, and you can have
the other.  But I have first choice, because I am consul."

Captain Travis's consular outfit consisted of one full dress and one
undress United States uniform.  Albert put on the dress-coat over a
pair of white flannel trousers, and looked remarkably brave and
handsome.  Stedman, who was only eighteen and quite thin, did not
appear so well, until Albert suggested his padding out his chest and
shoulders with towels.  This made him rather warm, but helped his
general appearance.

"The two Bradleys must dress up, too," said Albert.  "I think they
ought to act as a guard of honor, don't you?  The only things I have
are blazers and jerseys; but it doesn't much matter what they wear, as
long as they dress alike."

He accordingly called in the two Bradleys, and gave them each a pair of
the captain's rejected white duck trousers, and a blue jersey apiece,
with a big white Y on it.

"The students of Yale gave me that," he said to the younger Bradley,
"in which to play football, and a great man gave me the other.  His
name is Walter Camp; and if you rip or soil that jersey, I'll send you
back to England in irons; so be careful."

Stedman gazed at his companions in their different costumes,
doubtfully.  "It reminds me," he said, "of private theatricals.  Of the
time our church choir played 'Pinafore.'"

"Yes," assented Albert; "but I don't think we look quite gay enough.  I
tell you what we need,--medals.  You never saw a diplomat without a lot
of decorations and medals."

"Well, I can fix that," Stedman said.  "I've got a trunkful.  I used to
be the fastest bicycle-rider in Connecticut, and I've got all my prizes
with me."

Albert said doubtfully that that wasn't exactly the sort of medal he
meant.

"Perhaps not," returned Stedman, as he began fumbling in his trunk;
"but the King won't know the difference.  He couldn't tell a cross of
the Legion of Honor from a medal for the tug of war."

So the bicycle medals, of which Stedman seemed to have an innumerable
quantity, were strung in profusion over Albert's uniform, and in a
lesser quantity over Stedman's; while a handful of leaden ones, those
sold on the streets for the Constitutional Centennial, with which
Albert had provided himself, were wrapped up in a red silk handkerchief
for presentation to the King; with them Albert placed a number of brass
rods and brass chains, much to Stedman's delighted approval.

"That is a very good idea," he said.  "Democratic simplicity is the
right thing at home, of course; but when you go abroad and mix with
crowned heads, you want to show them that you know what's what."

"Well," said Albert, gravely, "I sincerely hope this crowned head don't
know what's what.  If he reads 'Connecticut Agricultural State Fair.
One mile bicycle race.  First Prize,' on this badge, when we are trying
to make him believe it's a war medal, it may hurt his feelings."

Bradley, Jr., went ahead to announce the approach of the American
embassy, which he did with so much manner that the King deferred the
audience a half-hour, in order that he might better prepare to receive
his visitors.  When the audience did take place, it attracted the
entire population to the green spot in front of the King's palace, and
their delight and excitement over the appearance of the visitors was
sincere and hearty.  The King was too polite to appear much surprised,
but he showed his delight over his presents as simply and openly as a
child.  Thrice he insisted on embracing Albert, and kissing him three
times on the forehead, which, Stedman assured him in a side-whisper,
was a great honor; an honor which was not extended to the secretary,
although he was given a necklace of animals' claws instead, with which
he was better satisfied.

After this reception, the embassy marched back to the consul's office,
surrounded by an immense number of the natives, some of whom ran ahead
and looked back at them, and crowded so close that the two Bradleys had
to poke at those nearest with their guns.  The crowd remained outside
the office even after the procession of four had disappeared, and
cheered.  This suggested to Gordon that this would be a good time to
make a speech, which he accordingly did, Stedman translating it,
sentence by sentence.  At the conclusion of this effort, Albert
distributed a number of brass rings among the married men present,
which they placed on whichever finger fitted best, and departed
delighted.

Albert had wished to give the rings to the married women, but Stedman
pointed out to him that it would be much cheaper to give them to the
married men; for while one woman could only have one husband, one man
could have at least six wives.

"And now, Stedman," said Albert, after the mob had gone, "tell me what
you are doing on this island."

"It's a very simple story," Stedman said.  "I am the representative, or
agent, or operator, for the Yokohama Cable Company.  The Yokohama Cable
Company is a company organized in San Francisco, for the purpose of
laying a cable to Yokohama.  It is a stock company; and though it
started out very well, the stock has fallen very low.  Between
ourselves, it is not worth over three or four cents.  When the officers
of the company found out that no one would buy their stock, and that no
one believed in them or their scheme, they laid a cable to Octavia, and
extended it on to this island.  Then they said they had run out of
ready money, and would wait until they got more before laying their
cable any farther.  I do not think they ever will lay it any farther,
but that is none of my business.  My business is to answer cable
messages from San Francisco, so that the people who visit the home
office can see that at least a part of the cable is working.  That
sometimes impresses them, and they buy stock.  There is another chap
over in Octavia, who relays all my messages and all my replies to those
messages that come to me through him from San Francisco.  They never
send a message unless they have brought someone to the office whom they
want to impress, and who, they think, has money to invest in the Y.C.C.
stock, and so we never go near the wire, except at three o'clock every
afternoon.  And then generally only to say 'How are you?' or 'It's
raining,' or something like that.  I've been saying 'It's raining,' now
for the last three months, but to-day I will say that the new consul
has arrived.  That will be a pleasant surprise for the chap in Octavia,
for he must be tired hearing about the weather.  He generally answers,
'Here too,' or 'So you said,' or something like that.  I don't know
what he says to the home office.  He's brighter than I am, and that's
why they put him between the two ends.  He can see that the messages
are transmitted more fully and more correctly, in a way to please
possible subscribers."

"Sort of copy editor," suggested Albert.

"Yes, something of that sort, I fancy," said Stedman.

They walked down to the little shed on the shore, where the Y.C.C.
office was placed, at three that day, and Albert watched Stedman send
off his message with much interest.  The "chap at Octavia," on being
informed that the American consul had arrived at Opeki, inquired,
somewhat disrespectfully, "Is it a life sentence?"

"What does he mean by that?" asked Albert.

"I suppose," said his secretary, doubtfully, "that he thinks it a sort
of a punishment to be sent to Opeki.  I hope you won't grow to think
so."

"Opeki is all very well," said Gordon, "or it will be when we get
things going our way."

As they walked back to the office, Albert noticed a brass cannon,
perched on a rock at the entrance to the harbor.  This had been put
there by the last consul, but it had not been fired for many years.
Albert immediately ordered the two Bradleys to get it in order, and to
rig up a flag-pole beside it, for one of his American flags, which they
were to salute every night when they lowered it at sundown.

"And when we are not using it," he said, "the King can borrow it to
celebrate with, if he doesn't impose on us too often.  The royal salute
ought to be twenty-one guns, I think; but that would use up too much
powder, so he will have to content himself with two."

"Did you notice," asked Stedman, that night, as they sat on the veranda
of the consul's house, in the moonlight, "how the people bowed to us as
we passed?"

"Yes," Albert said he had noticed it.  "Why?"

"Well, they never saluted me," replied Stedman.  "That sign of respect
is due to the show we made at the reception."

"It is due to us, in any event," said the consul, severely.  "I tell
you, my secretary, that we, as the representatives of the United States
Government, must be properly honored on this island.  We must become a
power.  And we must do so without getting into trouble with the King.
We must make them honor him, too, and then as we push him up, we will
push ourselves up at the same time."

"They don't think much of consuls in Opeki," said Stedman, doubtfully.
"You see the last one was a pretty poor sort.  He brought the office
into disrepute, and it wasn't really until I came and told them what a
fine country the United States was, that they had any opinion of it at
all.  Now we must change all that."

"That is just what we will do," said Albert.  "We will transform Opeki
into a powerful and beautiful city.  We will make these people work.
They must put up a palace for the King, and lay out streets, and build
wharves, and drain the town properly, and light it.  I haven't seen
this patent lighting apparatus of yours, but you had better get to work
at it at once, and I'll persuade the King to appoint you commissioner
of highways and gas, with authority to make his people toil.  And I,"
he cried, in free enthusiasm, "will organize a navy and a standing
army.  Only," he added, with a relapse of interest, "there isn't
anybody to fight."

"There isn't?" said Stedman, grimly, with a scornful smile.  "You just
go hunt up old Messenwah and the Hillmen with your standing army once
and you'll get all the fighting you want."

"The Hillmen?" said Albert.

"The Hillmen are the natives that live up there in the hills," Stedman
said, nodding his head toward the three high mountains at the other end
of the island, that stood out blackly against the purple, moonlit sky.
"There are nearly as many of them as there are Opekians, and they hunt
and fight for a living and for the pleasure of it.  They have an old
rascal named Messenwah for a king, and they come down here about once
every three months, and tear things up."

Albert sprang to his feet.

"Oh, they do, do they?" he said, staring up at the mountain-tops.
"They come down here and tear up things, do they?  Well, I think we'll
stop that, I think we'll stop that!  I don't care how many there are.
I'll get the two Bradleys to tell me all they know about drilling,
to-morrow morning, and we'll drill these Opekians, and have sham
battles, and attacks, and repulses, until I make a lot of wild, howling
Zulus out of them.  And when the Hillmen come down to pay their
quarterly visit, they'll go back again on a run.  At least some of them
will," he added, ferociously.  "Some of them will stay right here."

"Dear me, dear me!" said Stedman, with awe; "you are a born fighter,
aren't you?"

"Well, you wait and see," said Gordon; "maybe I am.  I haven't studied
tactics of war and the history of battles, so that I might be a great
war-correspondent, without learning something.  And there is only one
king on this island, and that is old Ollypybus himself.  And I'll go
over and have a talk with him about it to-morrow."

Young Stedman walked up and down the length of the veranda, in and out
of the moonlight, with his hands in his pockets, and his head on his
chest.  "You have me all stirred up, Gordon," he said; "you seem so
confident and bold, and you're not so much older than I am, either."

"My training has been different; that's all," said the reporter.

"Yes," Stedman said, bitterly.  "I have  been sitting in an office ever
since I left school, sending news over a wire or a cable, and you have
been out in the world, gathering it."

"And now," said Gordon, smiling, and putting his arm around the other
boy's shoulders, "we are going to make news ourselves."

"There is one thing I want to say to you before you turn in," said
Stedman.  "Before you suggest all these improvements on Ollypybus, you
must remember that he has ruled absolutely here for twenty years, and
that he does not think much of consuls.  He has only seen your
predecessor and yourself.  He likes you because you appeared with such
dignity, and because of the presents; but if I were you, I wouldn't
suggest these improvements as coming from yourself."

 "I don't understand," said Gordon; "who could they come from?"

"Well," said Stedman, "if you will allow me to advise--and you see I
know these people pretty well--I would have all these suggestions come
from the President direct."

"The President!" exclaimed Gordon; "but how?  What does the President
know or care about Opeki? and it would take so long--oh, I see, the
cable.  Is that what you have been doing?" he asked.

"Well, only once," said Stedman, guiltily; "that was when he wanted to
turn me out of the consul's office, and I had a cable that very
afternoon, from the President, ordering me to stay where I was.
Ollypybus doesn't understand the cable, of course, but he knows that it
sends messages; and sometimes I pretend to send messages for him to the
President; but he began asking me to tell the President to come and pay
him a visit, and I had to stop it."

"I'm glad you told me," said Gordon.  "The President shall begin to
cable to-morrow.  He will need an extra appropriation from Congress to
pay for his private cablegrams alone."

"And there's another thing," said Stedman.  "In all your plans, you've
arranged for the people's improvement, but not for their amusement; and
they are a peaceful, jolly, simple sort of people, and we must please
them."

"Have they no games or amusements of their own?" asked Gordon.

"Well, not what we would call games."

"Very well, then, I'll teach them base-ball.  Foot-ball would be too
warm.  But that plaza in front of the King's bungalow, where his palace
is going to be, is just the place for a diamond.  On the whole,
though," added the consul, after a moment's reflection, "you'd better
attend to that yourself.  I don't think it becomes my dignity as
American consul to take off my coat and give lessons to young Opekians
in sliding to bases; do you?  No; I think you'd better do that.  The
Bradleys will help you, and you had better begin to-morrow.  You have
been wanting to know what a secretary of legation's duties are, and now
you know.  It's to organize base-ball nines.  And after you get yours
ready," he added, as he turned into his room for the night, "I'll train
one that will sweep yours off the face of the island.  For THIS
American consul can pitch three curves."

The best laid plans of men go far astray, sometimes, and the great and
beautiful city that was to rise on the coast of Opeki was not built in
a day.  Nor was it ever built.  For before the Bradleys could mark out
the foul-lines for the base-ball field on the plaza, or teach their
standing army the goose step, or lay bamboo pipes for the water-mains,
or clear away the cactus for the extension of the King's palace, the
Hillmen paid Opeki their quarterly visit.

Albert had called on the King the next morning, with Stedman as his
interpreter, as he had said he would, and, with maps and sketches, had
shown his Majesty what he proposed to do toward improving Opeki and
ennobling her king, and when the King saw Albert's free-hand sketches
of wharves with tall ships lying at anchor, and rows of Opekian
warriors with the Bradleys at their head, and the design for his new
palace, and a royal sedan chair, he believed that these things were
already his, and not still only on paper, and he appointed Albert his
Minister of War, Stedman his Minister of Home Affairs, and selected two
of his wisest and oldest subjects to serve them as joint advisers.  His
enthusiasm was even greater than Gordon's, because he did not
appreciate the difficulties.  He thought Gordon a semi-god, a worker of
miracles, and urged the putting up of a monument to him at once in the
public plaza, to which Albert objected, on the ground that it would be
too suggestive of an idol; and to which Stedman also objected, but for
the less unselfish reason that it would "be in the way of the pitcher's
box."

They were feverishly discussing all these great changes, and Stedman
was translating as rapidly as he could translate, the speeches of four
different men--for the two counsellors had been called in--all of whom
wanted to speak at once when there came from outside a great shout, and
the screams of women, and the clashing of iron, and the pattering
footsteps of men running.

As they looked at one another in startled surprise, a native ran into
the room, followed by Bradley, Jr., and threw himself down before the
King.  While he talked, beating his hands and bowing before Ollypybus,
Bradley, Jr., pulled his forelock to the consul, and told how this man
lived on the far outskirts of the village; how he had been captured
while out hunting, by a number of the Hillmen; and how he had escaped
to tell the people that their old enemies were on the war-path again,
and rapidly approaching the village.

Outside, the women were gathering in the plaza, with the children about
them, and the men were running from hut to hut, warning their fellows,
and arming themselves with spears and swords, and the native bows and
arrows.

"They might have waited until we had that army trained," said Gordon,
in a tone of the keenest displeasure.  "Tell me, quick, what do they
generally do when they come?"

"Steal all the cattle and goats, and a woman or two, and set fire to
the huts in the outskirts," replied Stedman.

"Well, we must stop them," said Gordon, jumping up.  "We must take out
a flag of truce and treat with them.  They must be kept off until I
have my army in working order.  It is most inconvenient.  If they had
only waited two months, now, or six weeks even, we could have done
something; but now we must make peace.  Tell the King we are going out
to fix things with them, and tell him to keep off his warriors until he
learns whether we succeed or fail."

"But, Gordon!" gasped Stedman.  "Albert!  You don't understand.  Why,
man, this isn't a street-fight or a cane-rush.  They'll stick you full
of spears, dance on your body, and eat you, maybe.  A flag of
truce!--you're talking nonsense.  What do they know of a flag of truce?"

"You're talking nonsense, too," said Albert, "and you're talking to
your superior officer.  If you are not with me in this, go back to your
cable, and tell the man in Octavia that it's a warm day, and that the
sun is shining; but if you've any spirit in you--and I think you
have--run to the office and get my Winchester rifles, and the two
shotguns, and my revolvers, and my uniform, and a lot of brass things
for presents, and run all the way there and back.  And make time.  Play
you're riding a bicycle at the Agricultural Fair."

Stedman did not hear this last, for he was already off and away,
pushing through the crowd, and calling on Bradley, Sr., to follow him.
Bradley, Jr., looked at Gordon with eyes that snapped, like a dog that
is waiting for his master to throw a stone.

"I can fire a Winchester, sir," he said.  "Old Tom can't.  He's no good
at long range 'cept with a big gun, sir.  Don't give him the
Winchester.  Give it to me, please, sir."

Albert met Stedman in the plaza, and pulled off his blazer, and put on
Captain Travis's--now his--uniform coat, and his white pith helmet.

"Now, Jack," he said, "get up there and tell these people that we are
going out to make peace with these Hillmen, or bring them back
prisoners of war.  Tell them we are the preservers of their homes and
wives and children; and you, Bradley, take these presents, and young
Bradley, keep close to me, and carry this rifle."

Stedman's speech was hot and wild enough to suit a critical and
feverish audience before a barricade in Paris.  And when he was
through, Gordon and Bradley punctuated his oration by firing off the
two Winchester rifles in the air, at which the people jumped and fell
on their knees, and prayed to their several gods.  The fighting men of
the village followed the four white men to the outskirts, and took up
their stand there as Stedman told them to do, and the four walked on
over the roughly hewn road, to meet the enemy.

Gordon walked with Bradley, Jr., in advance.  Stedman and old Tom
Bradley followed close behind, with the two shot-guns, and the presents
in a basket.

"Are these Hillmen used to guns?" asked Gordon.  Stedman said no, they
were not.

"This shot-gun of mine is the only one on the island," he explained,
"and we never came near enough them before to do anything with it.  It
only carries a hundred yards.  The Opekians never make any show of
resistance.  They are quite content if the Hillmen satisfy themselves
with the outlying huts, as long as they leave them and the town alone;
so they seldom come to close quarters."

The four men walked on for half an hour or so in silence, peering
eagerly on every side; but it was not until they had left the woods and
marched out into the level stretch of grassy country that they came
upon the enemy.  The Hillmen were about forty in number, and were as
savage and ugly-looking giants as any in a picture-book.  They had
captured a dozen cows and goats, and were driving them on before them,
as they advanced farther upon the village.  When they saw the four men,
they gave a mixed chorus of cries and yells, and some of them stopped,
and others ran forward, shaking their spears, and shooting their broad
arrows into the ground before them.  A tall, gray-bearded, muscular old
man, with a skirt of feathers about him, and necklaces of bones and
animals' claws around his bare chest, ran in front of them, and seemed
to be trying to make them approach more slowly.

"Is that Messenwah?" asked Gordon.

"Yes," said Stedman; "he is trying to keep them back.  I don't believe
he ever saw a white man before."

"Stedman," said Albert, speaking quickly, "give your gun to Bradley,
and go forward with your arms in the air, and waving your handkerchief,
and tell them in their language that the King is coming.  If they go at
you, Bradley and I will kill a goat or two, to show them what we can do
with the rifles; and if that don't stop them, we will shoot at their
legs; and if that don't stop them--I guess you'd better come back, and
we'll all run."

Stedman looked at Albert, and Albert looked at Stedman, and neither of
them winced or flinched.

"Is this another of my secretary's duties?" asked the younger boy.

"Yes," said the consul; "but a resignation is always in order.  You
needn't go if you don't like it.  You see, you know the language and I
don't, but I know how to shoot, and you don't."

"That's perfectly satisfactory," said Stedman, handing his gun to old
Bradley.  "I only wanted to know why I was to be sacrificed instead of
one of the Bradleys.  It's because I know the language.  Bradley, Sr.,
you see the evil results of a higher education.  Wish me luck, please,"
he said, "and for goodness' sake," he added impressively, "don't waste
much time shooting goats."

The Hillmen had stopped about two hundred yards off, and were drawn up
in two lines, shouting, and dancing, and hurling taunting remarks at
their few adversaries.  The stolen cattle were bunched together back of
the King.  As Stedman walked steadily forward with his handkerchief
fluttering, and howling out something in their own tongue, they stopped
and listened.  As he advanced, his three companions followed him at
about fifty yards in the rear.  He was one hundred and fifty yards from
the Hillmen before they made out what he said, and then one of the
young braves, resenting it as an insult to his chief, shot an arrow at
him.  Stedman dodged the arrow and stood his ground without even taking
a step backward, only turning slightly to put his hands to his mouth,
and to shout something which sounded to his companions like, "About
time to begin on the goats."  But the instant the young man had fired,
King Messenwah swung his club and knocked him down, and none of the
others moved.  Then Messenwah advanced before his men to meet Stedman,
and on Stedman's opening and shutting his hands to show that he was
unarmed, the King threw down his club and spears, and came forward as
empty-handed as himself.

"Ah," gasped Bradley, Jr., with his finger trembling on his lever, "let
me take a shot at him now."  Gordon struck the man's gun up, and walked
forward in all the glory of his gold and blue uniform; for both he and
Stedman saw now that Messenwah was more impressed by their appearance,
and in the fact that they were white men, than with any threats of
immediate war.  So when he saluted Gordon haughtily, that young man
gave him a haughty nod in return, and bade Stedman tell the King that
he would permit him to sit down.  The King did not quite appear to like
this, but he sat down, nevertheless, and nodded his head gravely.

"Now tell him," said Gordon, "that I come from the ruler of the
greatest nation on earth, and that I recognize Ollypybus as the only
King of this island, and that I come to this little three-penny King
with either peace and presents, or bullets and war."

"Have I got to tell him he's a little three-penny King?" said Stedman,
plaintively.

"No; you needn't give a literal translation; it can be as free as you
please."

"Thanks," said the secretary, humbly.

"And tell him," continued Gordon, "that we will give presents to him
and his warriors if he keeps away from Ollypybus, and agrees to keep
away always.  If he won't do that, try to get him to agree to stay away
for three months at least, and by that time we can get word to San
Francisco, and have a dozen muskets over here in two months; and when
our time of probation is up, and he and his merry men come dancing down
the hillside, we will blow them up as high as his mountains.  But you
needn't tell him that, either.  And if he is proud and haughty, and
would rather fight, ask him to restrain himself until we show what we
can do with our weapons at two hundred yards."

Stedman seated himself in the long grass in front of the King, and with
many revolving gestures of his arms, and much pointing at Gordon, and
profound nods and bows, retold what Gordon had dictated.  When he had
finished, the King looked at the bundle of presents, and at the guns,
of which Stedman had given a very wonderful account, but answered
nothing.

"I guess," said Stedman, with a sigh, "that we will have to give him a
little practical demonstration to help matters.  I am sorry, but I
think one of those goats has got to die.  It's like vivisection.  The
lower order of animals have to suffer for the good of the higher."

"Oh," said Bradley, Jr., cheerfully, "I'd just as soon shoot one of
those niggers as one of the goats."

So Stedman bade the King tell his men to drive a goat toward them, and
the King did so, and one of the men struck one of the goats with his
spear, and it ran clumsily across the plain.

"Take your time, Bradley," said Gordon.  "Aim low, and if you hit it,
you can have it for supper."

"And if you miss it," said Stedman, gloomily, "Messenwah may have us
for supper."

The Hillmen had seated themselves a hundred yards off, while the
leaders were debating, and they now rose curiously and watched Bradley,
as he sank upon one knee, and covered the goat with his rifle.  When it
was about one hundred and fifty yards off he fired, and the goat fell
over dead.

And then all the Hillmen, with the King himself, broke away on a run,
toward the dead animal, with much shouting.  The King came back alone,
leaving his people standing about and examining the goat.  He was much
excited, and talked and gesticulated violently.

"He says--" said Stedman; "he says----"

"What? yes, go on."

"He says--goodness me!--what do you think he says?"

"Well, what does he say?" cried Gordon, in great excitement.  "Don't
keep it all to yourself."

"He says," said Stedman, "that we are deceived; that he is no longer
King of the Island of Opeki; that he is in great fear of us, and that
he has got himself into no end of trouble.  He says he sees that we are
indeed mighty men, that to us he is as helpless as the wild boar before
the javelin of the hunter."

"Well, he's right," said Gordon.  "Go on."

"But that which we ask is no longer his to give.  He has sold his
kingship and his right to this island to another king, who came to him
two days ago in a great canoe, and who made noises as we do--with guns,
I suppose he means--and to whom he sold the island for a watch that he
has in a bag around his neck.  And that he signed a paper, and made
marks on a piece of bark, to show that he gave up the island freely and
forever."

"What does he mean?" said Gordon.  "How can he give up the island?
Ollypybus is the king of half of it, anyway, and he knows it."

"That's just it," said Stedman.  "That's what frightens him.  He said
he didn't care about Ollypybus, and didn't count him in when he made
the treaty, because he is such a peaceful chap that he knew he could
thrash him into doing anything he wanted him to do.  And now that you
have turned up and taken Ollypybus's part, he wishes he hadn't sold the
island, and wishes to know if you are angry."

"Angry? of course I'm angry," said Gordon, glaring as grimly at the
frightened monarch as he thought was safe.  "Who wouldn't be angry?
Who do you think these people were who made a fool of him, Stedman?
Ask him to let us see this watch."

Stedman did so, and the King fumbled among his necklaces until he had
brought out a leather bag tied round his neck with a cord, and
containing a plain stem-winding silver watch marked on the inside
"Munich."

"That doesn't tell anything," said Gordon.  "But it's plain enough.
Some foreign ship of war has settled on this place as a
coaling-station, or has annexed it for colonization, and they've sent a
boat ashore, and they've made a treaty with this old chap, and forced
him to sell his birthright for a mess of porridge.  Now, that's just
like those monarchical pirates, imposing upon a poor old black."

Old Bradley looked at him impudently.

"Not at all," said Gordon; "it's quite different with us; we don't want
to rob him or Ollypybus, or to annex their land.  All we want to do is
to, improve it, and have the fun of running it for them and meddling in
their affairs of state.  Well, Stedman," he said, "what shall we do?"

Stedman said that the best and only thing to do was to threaten to take
the watch away from Messenwah, but to give him a revolver instead,
which would make a friend of him for life, and to keep him supplied
with cartridges only as long as he behaved himself, and then to make
him understand that, as Ollypybus had not given his consent to the loss
of the island, Messenwah's agreement, or treaty, or whatever it was,
did not stand, and that he had better come down the next day, early in
the morning, and join in a general consultation.  This was done, and
Messenwah agreed willingly to their proposition, and was given his
revolver and shown how to shoot it, while the other presents were
distributed among the other men, who were as happy over them as girls
with a full dance-card.

"And now, to-morrow," said Stedman, "understand, you are all to come
down unarmed, and sign a treaty with great Ollypybus, in which he will
agree to keep to one-half of the island if you keep to yours, and there
must be no more wars or goat-stealing, or this gentleman on my right
and I will come up and put holes in you just as the gentleman on the
left did with the goat."

Messenwah and his warriors promised to come early, and saluted
reverently as Gordon and his three companions walked up together very
proudly and stiffly.

"Do you know how I feel?" said Gordon.

"How?" asked Stedman.

"I feel as I used to do in the city, when the boys in the street were
throwing snowballs, and I had to go by with a high hat on my head and
pretend not to know they were behind me.  I always felt a cold chill
down my spinal column, and I could feel that snowball, whether it came
or not, right in the small of my back.  And I can feel one of those men
pulling his bow now, and the arrow sticking out of my right shoulder."

"Oh, no, you can't," said Stedman.  "They are too much afraid of those
rifles.  But I do feel sorry for any of those warriors whom old man
Messenwah doesn't like, now that he has that revolver.  He isn't the
sort to practise on goats."

There was great rejoicing when Stedman and Gordon told their story to
the King, and the people learned that they were not to have their huts
burned and their cattle stolen.  The armed Opekians formed a guard
around the ambassadors and escorted them to their homes with cheers and
shouts, and the women ran at their side and tried to kiss Gordon's hand.

"I'm sorry I can't speak the language, Stedman," said Gordon, "or I
would tell them what a brave man you are.  You are too modest to do it
yourself, even if I  dictated something for you to say.  As for me," he
said, pulling off his uniform, "I am thoroughly disgusted and
disappointed. It never occurred to me until it was all over that this
was my chance to be a war-correspondent.  It wouldn't have been much of
a war, but then I would have been the only one on the spot, and that
counts for a great deal.  Still, my time may come."

"We have a great deal on hand for to-morrow," said Gordon that evening,
"and we had better turn in early."

And so the people were still singing and rejoicing down in the village
when the two conspirators for the peace of the country went to sleep
for the night.  It seemed to Gordon as though he had hardly turned his
pillow twice to get the coolest side when someone touched him, and he
saw, by the light of the dozen glow-worms in the tumbler by his
bedside, a tall figure at its foot.

"It's me--Bradley," said the figure.

"Yes," said Gordon, with the haste of a man to show that sleep has no
hold on him; "exactly; what is it?"

"There is a ship of war in the harbor," Bradley answered in a whisper.
"I heard her anchor chains rattle when she came to, and that woke me.
I could hear that if I were dead.  And then I made sure by her lights;
she's a great boat, sir, and I can know she's a ship of war by the
challenging when they change the watch.  I thought you'd like to know,
sir."

Gordon sat up and clutched his knees with his hands.  "Yes, of course,"
he said; "you are quite right.  Still, I don't see what there is to do."

He did not wish to show too much youthful interest, but though fresh
from civilization, he had learned how far from it he was, and he was
curious to see this sign of it that had come so much more quickly than
he had anticipated.

"Wake Mr. Stedman, will you?" said he, "and we will go and take a look
at her."

"You can see nothing but the lights," said Bradley, as he left the
room; "it's a black night, sir."

Stedman was not new from the sight of men and ships of war, and came in
half dressed and eager.

"Do you suppose it's the big canoe Messenwah spoke of?" he said.

"I thought of that," said Gordon.

The three men fumbled their way down the road to the plaza, and saw, as
soon as they turned into it, the great outlines and the brilliant
lights of an immense vessel, still more immense in the darkness, and
glowing like a strange monster of the sea, with just a suggestion here
and there, where the lights spread, of her cabins and bridges.  As they
stood on the shore, shivering in the cool night-wind, they heard the
bells strike over the water.

"It's two o'clock," said Bradley, counting.

"Well, we can do nothing, and they cannot mean to do much to-night,"
Albert said.  "We had better get some more sleep, and, Bradley, you
keep watch and tell us as soon as day breaks."

"Aye, aye, sir," said the sailor.

"If that's the man-of-war that made the treaty with Messenwah, and
Messenwah turns up to-morrow, it looks as if our day would be pretty
well filled up," said Albert, as they felt their way back to the
darkness.

"What do you intend to do?" asked his secretary, with a voice of some
concern.

"I don't know," Albert answered gravely, from the blackness of the
night.  "It looks as if we were getting ahead just a little too fast,
doesn't it?  Well," he added, as they reached the house, "let's try to
keep in step with the procession, even if we can't be drum-majors and
walk in front of it."  And with this cheering tone of confidence in
their ears, the two diplomats went soundly asleep again.

The light of the rising sun filled the room, and the parrots were
chattering outside, when Bradley woke him again.

"They are sending a boat ashore, sir," he said, excitedly, and filled
with the importance of the occasion.  "She's a German man-of-war, and
one of the new model.  A beautiful boat, sir; for her lines were laid
in Glasgow, and I can tell that, no matter what flag she flies.  You
had best be moving to meet them: the village isn't awake yet."

Albert took a cold bath and dressed leisurely; then he made Bradley,
Jr., who had slept through it all, get up breakfast, and the two young
men ate it and drank their coffee comfortably and with an air of
confidence that deceived their servants, if it did not deceive
themselves.  But when they came down the path, smoking and swinging
their sticks, and turned into the plaza, their composure left them like
a mask, and they stopped where they stood.  The plaza was enclosed by
the natives gathered in whispering groups, and depressed by fear and
wonder.  On one side were crowded all the Messenwah warriors, unarmed,
and as silent and disturbed as the Opekians.  In the middle of the
plaza some twenty sailors were busy rearing and bracing a tall
flag-staff that they had shaped from a royal palm, and they did this as
unconcernedly and as contemptuously, and with as much indifference to
the strange groups on either side of them, as though they were working
on a barren coast, with nothing but the startled sea-gulls about them.
As Albert and Stedman came upon the scene, the flag-pole was in place,
and the halyards hung from it with a little bundle of bunting at the
end of one of them.

"We must find the King at once," said Gordon.  He was terribly excited
and angry.  "It is easy enough to see what this means.  They are going
through the form of annexing this island to the other lands of the
German Government.  They are robbing old Ollypybus of what is his.
They have not even given him a silver watch for it."

The King was in his bungalow, facing the plaza.  Messenwah was with
him, and an equal number of each of their councils.  The common danger
had made them lie down together in peace; but they gave a murmur of
relief as Gordon strode into the room with no ceremony, and greeted
them with a curt wave of the hand.

"Now then, Stedman, be quick," he said.  "Explain to them what this
means; tell them that I will protect them; that I am anxious to see
that Ollypybus is not cheated; that we will do all we can for them."

Outside, on the shore, a second boat's crew had landed a group of
officers and a file of marines.  They walked in all the dignity of full
dress across the plaza to the flag-pole, and formed in line on the
three sides of it, with the marines facing the sea.  The officers, from
the captain with a prayer-book in his hand, to the youngest middy, were
as indifferent to the frightened natives about them as the other men
had been.  The natives, awed and afraid, crouched back among their
huts, the marines and the sailors kept their eyes front, and the German
captain opened his prayer-book.  The debate in the bungalow was over.

"If you only had your uniform, sir," said Bradley, Sr., miserably.

"This is a little bit too serious for uniforms and bicycle medals,"
said Gordon.  "And these men are used to gold lace."

He pushed his way through the natives, and stepped confidently across
the plaza.  The youngest middy saw him coming, and nudged the one next
him with his elbow, and he nudged the next, but none of the officers
moved, because the captain had begun to read.

"One minute, please," called Gordon.

He stepped out into the hollow square formed by the marines, and raised
his helmet to the captain.

"Do you speak English or French?" Gordon said in French; "I do not
understand German."

The captain lowered the book in his hands and gazed reflectively at
Gordon through his spectacles, and made no reply.

"If I understand this," said the younger man, trying to be very
impressive and polite, "you are laying claim to this land, in behalf of
the German Government."

The captain continued to observe him thoughtfully, and then said, "That
iss so," and then asked, "Who are you?"

"I represent the King of this island, Ollypybus, whose people you see
around you.  I also represent the United States Government, that does
not tolerate a foreign power near her coast, since the days of
President Monroe and before.  The treaty you have made with Messenwah
is an absurdity.  There is only one king with whom to treat, and he----"

The captain turned to one of his officers and said something, and then,
after giving another curious glance at Gordon, raised his book and
continued reading, in a deep, unruffled monotone.  The officer
whispered an order, and two of the marines stepped out of line, and
dropping the muzzles of their muskets, pushed Gordon back out of the
enclosure, and left him there with his lips white, and trembling all
over with indignation.  He would have liked to have rushed back into
the lines and broken the captain's spectacles over his sun-tanned nose
and cheeks, but he was quite sure this would only result in his getting
shot, or in his being made ridiculous before the natives, which was
almost as bad; so he stood still for a moment, with his blood choking
him, and then turned and walked back to where the King and Stedman were
whispering together.  Just as he turned, one of the men pulled the
halyards, the ball of bunting ran up into the air, bobbed, twitched,
and turned, and broke into the folds of the German flag.  At the same
moment the marines raised their muskets and fired a volley, and the
officers saluted and the sailors cheered.

"Do you see that?" cried Stedman, catching Gordon's humor, to
Ollypybus; "that means that you are no longer king, that strange people
are coming here to take your land, and to turn your people into
servants, and to drive you back into the mountains.  Are you going to
submit? are you going to let that flag stay where it is?"

Messenwah and Ollypybus gazed at one another with fearful, helpless
eyes.  "We are afraid," Ollypybus cried; "we do not know what we should
do."

"What do they say?"

"They say they do not know what to do."

"I know what I'd do," cried Gordon.  "If I were not an American consul,
I'd pull down their old flag, and put a hole in their boat and sink
her."

"Well, I'd wait until they get under way before you do either of those
things," said Stedman, soothingly.  "That captain seems to be a man of
much determination of character."

"But I will pull it down," cried Gordon.  "I will resign, as Travis
did.  I am no longer consul.  You can be consul if you want to.  I
promote you.  I am going up a step higher.  I mean to be king.  Tell
those two," he ran on, excitedly, "that their only course and only hope
is in me; that they must make me ruler of the island until this thing
is over; that I will resign again as soon as it is settled, but that
someone must act at once, and if they are afraid to, I am not, only
they must give me authority to act for them.  They must abdicate in my
favor."

"Are you in earnest?" gasped Stedman.

"Don't I talk as if I were?" demanded Gordon, wiping the perspiration
from his forehead.

"And can I be consul?" said Stedman, cheerfully.

"Of course.  Tell them what I propose to do."

Stedman turned and spoke rapidly to the two kings.  The people gathered
closer to hear.

The two rival monarchs looked at one another in silence for a moment,
and then both began to speak at once, their counsellors interrupting
them and mumbling their guttural comments with anxious earnestness.  It
did not take them very long to see that, they were all of one mind, and
then they both turned to Gordon and dropped on one knee, and placed his
hands on their foreheads, and Stedman raised his cap.

"They agree," he explained, for it was but pantomime to Albert.  "They
salute you as a ruler; they are calling you Tellaman, which means
peacemaker.  The Peacemaker, that is your title. I hope you will
deserve it, but I think they might have chosen a more appropriate one."

"Then I'm really King?" demanded Albert, decidedly, "and I can do what
I please?  They give me full power.  Quick, do they?"

"Yes, but don't do it," begged Stedman, "and just remember I am
American consul now, and that is a much superior being to a crowned
monarch; you said so yourself."

Albert did not reply to this, but ran across the plaza, followed by the
two Bradleys.  The boats had gone.

"Hoist that flag beside the brass cannon," he cried, "and stand ready
to salute it when I drop this one."

Bradley, Jr., grasped the halyards of the flag, which he had forgotten
to raise and salute in the morning in all the excitement of the arrival
of the man-of-war.  Bradley, Sr., stood by the brass cannon, blowing
gently on his lighted fuse.  The Peacemaker took the halyards of the
German flag in his two hands, gave a quick, sharp tug, and down came
the red, white, and black piece of bunting, and the next moment young
Bradley sent the Stars and Stripes up in their place.  As it rose,
Bradley's brass cannon barked merrily like a little bull-dog, and the
Peacemaker cheered.

"Why don't you cheer, Stedman?" he shouted.  "Tell those people to
cheer for all they are worth.  What sort of an American consul are you?"

Stedman raised his arm half-heartedly to give the time, and opened his
mouth; but his arm remained fixed and his mouth open, while his eyes
stared at the retreating boat of the German man-of-war.  In the stern
sheets of this boat the stout German captain was struggling unsteadily
to his feet; he raised his arm and waved it to someone on the great
man-of-war, as though giving an order.  The natives looked from Stedman
to the boat, and even Gordon stopped in his cheering, and stood
motionless, watching.  They had not very long to wait.  There was a
puff of white smoke, and a flash, and then a loud report, and across
the water came a great black ball skipping lightly through and over the
waves, as easily as a flat stone thrown by a boy.  It seemed to come
very slowly.  At least it came slowly enough for everyone to see that
it was coming directly toward the brass cannon.  The Bradleys certainly
saw this, for they ran as fast as they could, and kept on running.  The
ball caught the cannon under its mouth and tossed it in the air,
knocking the flagpole into a dozen pieces, and passing on through two
of the palm-covered huts.

"Great Heavens, Gordon!" cried Stedman; "they are firing on us."

But Gordon's face was radiant and wild.

"Firing on US!" he cried.  "On us!  Don't you see?  Don't you
understand?  What do WE amount to?  They have fired on the American
flag!  Don't you see what that means?  It means war.  A great
international war.  And I am a war-correspondent at last!"  He ran up
to Stedman and seized him by the arm so tightly that it hurt.

"By three o'clock," he said, "they will know in the office what has
happened.  The country will know it to-morrow when the paper is on the
street; people will read it all over the world.  The Emperor will hear
of it at breakfast; the President will cable for further particulars.
He will get them.  It is the chance of a lifetime, and we are on the
spot!"

Stedman did not hear this; he was watching the broadside of the ship to
see another puff of white smoke, but there came no such sign.  The two
rowboats were raised, there was a cloud of black smoke from the funnel,
a creaking of chains sounding faintly across the water, and the ship
started at half-speed and moved out of the harbor.  The Opekians and
the Hillmen fell on their knees, or to dancing, as best suited their
sense of relief, but Gordon shook his head.

"They are only going to land the marines," he said; "perhaps they are
going to the spot they stopped at before, or to take up another
position farther out at sea.  They will land men and then shell the
town, and the land forces will march here and co-operate with the
vessel, and everybody will be taken prisoner or killed.  We have the
centre of the stage, and we are making history."

"I'd rather read it than make it," said Stedman.  "You've got us in a
senseless, silly position, Gordon, and a mighty unpleasant one.  And
for no reason that I can see, except to make copy for your paper."

"Tell those people to get their things together," said Gordon, "and
march back out of danger into the woods.  Tell Ollypybus I am going to
fix things all right; I don't know just how yet, but I will, and now
come after me as quickly as you can to the cable office.  I've got to
tell the paper all about it."

It was three o'clock before the "chap at Octavia" answered Stedman's
signalling.  Then Stedman delivered Gordon's message, and immediately
shut off all connection, before the Octavia operator could question
him.  Gordon dictated his message in this way:--

"Begin with the date line, 'Opeki, June 22.'

"At seven o'clock this morning, the captain and officers of the German
man-of-war Kaiser went through the ceremony of annexing this island in
the name of the German Emperor, basing their right to do so on an
agreement made with a leader of a wandering tribe known as the Hillmen.
King Ollypybus, the present monarch of Opeki, delegated his authority,
as also did the leader of the Hillmen, to King Tellaman, or the
Peacemaker, who tore down the German flag, and raised that of the
United States in its place.  At the same moment the flag was saluted by
the battery.  This salute, being mistaken for an attack on the Kaiser,
was answered by that vessel.  Her first shot took immediate effect,
completely destroying the entire battery of the Opekians, cutting down
the American flag, and destroying the houses of the people----"

"There was only one brass cannon and two huts," expostulated Stedman.

"Well, that was the whole battery, wasn't it?" asked Gordon, "and two
huts is plural.  I said houses of the people.  I couldn't say two
houses of the people.  Just you send this as you get it.  You are not
an American consul at the present moment.  You are an under-paid agent
of a cable company, and you send my stuff as I write it.  The American
residents have taken refuge in the consulate--that's us," explained
Gordon, "and the English residents have sought refuge in the
woods--that's the Bradleys.  King Tellaman--that's me--declares his
intention of fighting against the annexation.  The forces of the
Opekians are under the command of Captain Thomas Bradley--I guess I
might as well make him a colonel--of Colonel Thomas Bradley, of the
English army.

"The American consul says--Now, what do you say, Stedman?  Hurry up,
please," asked Gordon, "and say something good and strong."

"You get me all mixed up," complained Stedman, plaintively.  "Which am
I now, a cable operator or the American consul?"

"Consul, of course.  Say something patriotic and about your
determination to protect the interests of your government, and all
that."  Gordon bit the end of his pencil impatiently, and waited.

"I won't do anything of the sort, Gordon," said Stedman; "you are
getting me into an awful lot of trouble, and yourself too.  I won't say
a word."

"The American consul," read Gordon, as his pencil wriggled across the
paper, "refuses to say anything for publication until he has
communicated with the authorities at Washington, but from all I can
learn he sympathizes entirely with Tellaman.  Your correspondent has
just returned from an audience with King Tellaman, who asks him to
inform the American people that the Monroe doctrine will be sustained
as long as he rules this island.  I guess that's enough to begin with,"
said Gordon.  "Now send that off quick, and then get away from the
instrument before the man in Octavia begins to ask questions.  I am
going out to precipitate matters."

Gordon found the two kings sitting dejectedly side by side, and gazing
grimly upon the disorder of the village, from which the people were
taking their leave as quickly as they could get their few belongings
piled upon the ox-carts.  Gordon walked among them, helping them in
every way he could, and tasting, in their subservience and gratitude,
the sweets of sovereignty.  When Stedman had locked up the cable office
and rejoined him, he bade him tell Messenwah to send three of his
youngest men and fastest runners back to the hills to watch for the
German vessel and see where she was attempting to land her marines.

"This is a tremendous chance for descriptive writing, Stedman," said
Gordon, enthusiastically; "all this confusion and excitement, and the
people leaving their homes, and all that.  It's like the people getting
out of Brussels before Waterloo, and then the scene at the foot of the
mountains, while they are camping out there, until the Germans leave.
I never had a chance like this before."

It was quite dark by six o'clock, and none of the three messengers had
as yet returned.  Gordon walked up and down the empty plaza and  looked
now at the horizon for the man-of-war, and again down the road back of
the village.  But neither the vessel nor the messengers bearing word of
her appeared.  The night passed without any incident, and in the
morning Gordon's impatience became so great that he walked out to where
the villagers were in camp and passed on half way up the mountain, but
he could see no sign of the man-of-war.  He came back more restless
than before, and keenly disappointed.

"If something don't happen before three o'clock, Stedman," he said,
"our second cablegram will have to consist of glittering generalities
And a lengthy interview with King Tellaman, by himself."

Nothing did happen.  Ollypybus and Messenwah began to breathe more
freely.  They believed the new king had succeeded in frightening the
German vessel away forever.  But the new king upset their hopes by
telling them that the Germans had undoubtedly already landed, and had
probably killed the three messengers.

"Now then," he said, with pleased expectation, as Stedman and he seated
themselves in the cable office at three o'clock, "open it up and let's
find out what sort of an impression we have made."

Stedman's face, as the answer came in to his first message of greeting,
was one of strangely marked disapproval.

"What does he say?" demanded Gordon, anxiously.

"He hasn't done anything but swear yet," answered Stedman, grimly.

"What is he swearing about?"

"He wants to know why I left the cable yesterday.  He says he has been
trying to call me up for the last twenty-four hours, ever since I sent
my message at three o'clock.  The home office is jumping mad, and want
me discharged.  They won't do that, though," he said, in a cheerful
aside, "because they haven't paid me my salary for the last eight
months.  He says--great Scott! this will please you, Gordon--he says
that there have been over two hundred queries for matter from papers
all over the United States, and from Europe.  Your paper beat them on
the news, and now the home office is packed with San Francisco
reporters, and the telegrams are coming in every minute, and they have
been abusing him for not answering them, and he says that I'm a fool.
He wants as much as you can send, and all the details.  He says all the
papers will have to put 'By Yokohama Cable Company' on the top of each
message they print, and that that is advertising the company, and is
sending the stock up.  It rose fifteen points on 'change in San
Francisco to-day, and the president and the other officers are
buying----"

"Oh, I don't want to hear about their old company," snapped out Gordon,
pacing up and down in despair.  "What am I to do?  that's what I want
to know.  Here I have the whole country stirred up and begging for
news.  On their knees for it, and a cable all to myself, and the only
man on the spot, and nothing to say.  I'd just like to know how long
that German idiot intends to wait before he begins shelling this town
and killing people.  He has put me in a most absurd position."

"Here's a message for you, Gordon," said Stedman, with business-like
calm.  "Albert Gordon, Correspondent," he read: "Try American consul.
First message O. K.; beat the country; can take all you send.  Give
names of foreign residents massacred, and fuller account blowing up
palace.  Dodge."

The expression on Gordon's face as this message was slowly read off to
him, had changed from one of gratified pride to one of puzzled
consternation.

"What's he mean by foreign residents massacred, and blowing up of
palace?" asked Stedman, looking over his shoulder anxiously.  "Who is
Dodge?"

"Dodge is the night editor," said Gordon, nervously.  "They must have
read my message wrong.  You sent just what I gave you, didn't you?" he
asked.

"Of course I did," said Stedman, indignantly.  "I didn't say anything
about the massacre of anybody, did I?" asked Gordon.  "I hope they are
not improving on my account.  What AM I to do?  This is getting awful.
I'll have to go out and kill a few people myself.  Oh, why don't that
Dutch captain begin to do something!  What sort of a fighter does he
call himself?  He wouldn't shoot at a school of porpoises.  He's
not----"

"Here comes a message to Leonard T. Travis, American consul, Opeki,"
read Stedman.  "It's raining messages to-day.  'Send full details of
massacre of American citizens by German sailors.'  Secretary of--great
Scott!" gasped Stedman, interrupting himself and gazing at his
instrument with horrified fascination--"the Secretary of State."

"That settles it," roared Gordon, pulling at his hair and burying his
face in his hands.  "I have GOT to kill some of them now."

"Albert Gordon, Correspondent," read Stedman, impressively, like the
voice of Fate.  "Is Colonel Thomas Bradley commanding native forces at
Opeki, Colonel Sir Thomas Kent-Bradley of Crimean war fame?
Correspondent London Times, San Francisco Press Club."

"Go on, go on!" said Gordon, desperately.  "I'm getting used to it now.
Go on!"

"American consul, Opeki," read Stedman.  "Home Secretary desires you to
furnish list of names English residents killed during shelling of Opeki
by ship of war Kaiser, and estimate of amount property destroyed.
Stoughton, British Embassy, Washington."

"Stedman!" cried Gordon, jumping to his feet, "there's a mistake here
somewhere.  These people cannot all have made my message read like
that.  Someone has altered it, and now I have got to make these people
here live up to that message, whether they like being massacred and
blown up or not.  Don't answer any of those messages except the one
from Dodge; tell him things have quieted down a bit, and that I'll send
four thousand words on the flight of the natives from the village, and
their encampment at the foot of the mountains, and of the exploring
party we have sent out to look for the German vessel; and now I am
going out to make something happen."

Gordon said that he would be gone for two hours at least, and as
Stedman did not feel capable of receiving any more nerve-stirring
messages, he cut off all connection with Octavia by saying, "Good-by
for two hours," and running away from the office.  He sat down on a
rock on the beach, and mopped his face with his handkerchief.

"After a man has taken nothing more exciting than weather reports from
Octavia for a year," he soliloquized, "it's a bit disturbing to have
all the crowned heads of Europe and their secretaries calling upon you
for details of a massacre that never came off."

At the end of two hours Gordon returned from the consulate with a mass
of manuscript in his hand.

"Here's three thousand words," he said, desperately.  "I never wrote
more and said less in my life.  It will make them weep at the office.
I had to pretend that they knew all that had happened so far; they
apparently do know more than we do, and I have filled it full of
prophesies of more trouble ahead, and with interviews with myself and
the two ex-Kings.  The only news element in it is, that the messengers
have returned to report that the German vessel is not in sight, and
that there is no news.  They think she has gone for good.  Suppose she
has, Stedman," he groaned, looking at him helplessly, "what AM I going
to do?"

"Well, as for me," said Stedman, "I'm afraid to go near that cable.
It's like playing with a live wire.  My nervous system won't stand many
more such shocks as those they gave us this morning."

Gordon threw himself down dejectedly in a chair in the office, and
Stedman approached his instrument gingerly, as though it might explode.

"He's swearing again," he explained, sadly, in answer to Gordon's look
of inquiry.  "He wants to know when I am going to stop running away
from the wire.  He has a stack of messages to send, he says, but I
guess he'd better wait and take your copy first; don't you think so?"

"Yes, I do," said Gordon.  "I don't want any more messages than I've
had.  That's the best I can do," he said, as he threw his manuscript
down beside Stedman.  "And they can keep on cabling until the wire
burns red hot, and they won't get any more."

There was silence in the office for some time, while Stedman looked
over Gordon's copy, and Gordon stared dejectedly out at the ocean.

"This is pretty poor stuff, Gordon," said Stedman.  "It's like giving
people milk when they want brandy."

"Don't you suppose I know that?" growled Gordon.  "It's the best I can
do, isn't it?  It's not my fault that we are not all dead now.  I can't
massacre foreign residents if there are no foreign residents, but I can
commit suicide, though, and I'll do it if something don't happen."

There was a long pause, in which the silence of the office was only
broken by the sound of the waves beating on the coral reefs outside.
Stedman raised his head wearily.

"He's swearing again," he said; "he says this stuff of yours is all
nonsense.  He says stock in the Y.C.C. has gone up to one hundred and
two, and that owners are unloading and making their fortunes, and that
this sort of descriptive writing is not what the company want."

"What's he think I'm here for?" cried Gordon.  "Does he think I pulled
down the German flag and risked my neck half a dozen times and had
myself made King just to boom his Yokohama cable stock?  Confound him!
You might at least swear back.  Tell him just what the situation is in
a few words.  Here, stop that rigmarole to the paper, and explain to
your home office that we are awaiting developments, and that, in the
meanwhile, they must put up with the best we can send them.  Wait; send
this to Octavia."

Gordon wrote rapidly, and read what he wrote as rapidly as it was
written.

"Operator, Octavia.  You seem to have misunderstood my first message.
The facts in the case are these.  A German man-of-war raised a flag on
this island.  It was pulled down and the American flag raised in its
place and saluted by a brass cannon.  The German man-of-war fired once
at the flag and knocked it down, and then steamed away and has not been
seen since.  Two huts were upset, that is all the damage done; the
battery consisted of the one brass cannon before mentioned.  No one,
either native or foreign, has been massacred.  The English residents
are two sailors.  The American residents are the young man who is
sending you this cable and myself.  Our first message was quite true in
substance, but perhaps misleading in detail.  I made it so because I
fully expected much more to happen immediately.  Nothing has happened,
or seems likely to happen, and that is the exact situation up to date.
Albert Gordon."

"Now," he asked, after a pause, "what does he say to that?"

"He doesn't say anything," said Stedman.

"I guess he has fainted.  Here it comes," he added in the same breath.
He bent toward his instrument, and Gordon raised himself from his chair
and stood beside him as he read it off.  The two young men hardly
breathed in the intensity of their interest.

"Dear Stedman," he slowly read aloud.  "You and your young friend are a
couple of fools.  If you had allowed me to send you the messages
awaiting transmission here to you, you would not have sent me such a
confession of guilt as you have just done.  You had better leave Opeki
at once or hide in the hills.  I am afraid I have placed you in a
somewhat compromising position with the company, which is unfortunate,
especially as, if I am not mistaken, they owe you some back pay.  You
should have been wiser in your day, and bought Y.C.C. stock when it was
down to five cents, as 'yours truly' did.  You are not, Stedman, as
bright a boy as some.  And as for your friend, the war-correspondent,
he has queered himself for life.  You see, my dear Stedman, after I had
sent off your first message, and demands for further details came
pouring in, and I could not get you at the wire to supply them, I took
the liberty of sending some on myself."

"Great Heavens!" gasped Gordon.

Stedman grew very white under his tan, and the perspiration rolled on
his cheeks.

"Your message was so general in its nature, that it allowed my
imagination full play, and I sent on what I thought would please the
papers, and, what was much more important to me, would advertise the
Y.C.C. stock.  This I have been doing while waiting for material from
you.  Not having a clear idea of the dimensions or population of Opeki,
it is possible that I have done you and your newspaper friend some
injustice.  I killed off about a hundred American residents, two
hundred English, because I do not like the English, and a hundred
French.  I blew up old Ollypybus and his palace with dynamite, and
shelled the city, destroying some hundred thousand dollars' worth of
property, and then I waited anxiously for your friend to substantiate
what I had said.  This he has most unkindly failed to do.  I am very
sorry, but much more so for him than for myself, for I, my dear friend,
have cabled on to a man in San Francisco, who is one of the directors
of the Y.C.C., to sell all my stock, which he has done at one hundred
and two, and he is keeping the money until I come.  And I leave Octavia
this afternoon to reap my just reward.  I am in about twenty thousand
dollars on your little war, and I feel grateful.  So much so that I
will inform you that the ship of war Kaiser has arrived at San
Francisco, for which port she sailed directly from Opeki.  Her captain
has explained the real situation, and offered to make every amend for
the accidental indignity shown to our flag.  He says he aimed at the
cannon, which was trained on his vessel, and which had first fired on
him.  But you must know, my dear Stedman, that before his arrival,
war-vessels belonging to the several powers mentioned in my revised
despatches, had started for Opeki at full speed, to revenge the
butchery of the foreign residents.  A word, my dear young friend, to
the wise is sufficient.  I am indebted to you to the extent of twenty
thousand dollars, and in return I give you this kindly advice.  Leave
Opeki.  If there is no other way, swim.  But leave Opeki."

The sun, that night, as it sank below the line where the clouds seemed
to touch the sea, merged them both into a blazing, blood-red curtain,
and colored the most wonderful spectacle that the natives of Opeki had
ever seen.  Six great ships of war, stretching out over a league of
sea, stood blackly out against the red background, rolling and rising,
and leaping forward, flinging back smoke and burning sparks up into the
air behind them, and throbbing and panting like living creatures in
their race for revenge.  From the south came a three-decked vessel, a
great island of floating steel, with a flag as red as the angry sky
behind it, snapping in the wind.  To the south of it plunged two long
low-lying torpedo-boats, flying the French tri-color, and still farther
to the north towered three magnificent hulls of the White Squadron.
Vengeance was written on every curve and line, on each straining
engine-rod, and on each polished gun-muzzle.

And in front of these, a clumsy fishing-boat rose and fell on each
passing wave.  Two sailors sat in the stern, holding the rope and
tiller, and in the bow, with their backs turned forever toward Opeki,
stood two young boys, their faces lit by the glow of the setting sun
and stirred by the sight of the great engines of war plunging past them
on their errand of vengeance.

"Stedman," said the elder boy, in an awe-struck whisper, and with a
wave of his hand, "we have not lived in vain."

BY
RICHARD JEFFERIES

LONDON
CHATTO & WINDUS
1914




I.


Green rushes, long and thick, standing up above the edge of the ditch,
told the hour of the year as distinctly as the shadow on the dial the
hour of the day.  Green and thick and sappy to the touch, they felt like
summer, soft and elastic, as if full of life, mere rushes though they
were.  On the fingers they left a green scent; rushes have a separate
scent of green, so, too, have ferns, very different from that of grass or
leaves.  Rising from brown sheaths, the tall stems enlarged a little in
the middle, like classical columns, and heavy with their sap and
freshness, leaned against the hawthorn sprays.  From the earth they had
drawn its moisture, and made the ditch dry; some of the sweetness of the
air had entered into their fibres, and the rushes--the common rushes--were
full of beautiful summer.  The white pollen of early grasses growing on
the edge was dusted from them each time the hawthorn boughs were shaken
by a thrush.  These lower sprays came down in among the grass, and leaves
and grass-blades touched.  Smooth round stems of angelica, big as a gun-
barrel, hollow and strong, stood on the slope of the mound, their tiers
of well-balanced branches rising like those of a tree.  Such a sturdy
growth pushed back the ranks of hedge parsley in full white flower, which
blocked every avenue and winding bird's-path of the bank.  But the "gix,"
or wild parsnip, reached already high above both, and would rear its
fluted stalk, joint on joint, till it could face a man.  Trees they were
to the lesser birds, not even bending if perched on; but though so stout,
the birds did not place their nests on or against them.  Something in the
odour of these umbelliferous plants, perhaps, is not quite liked; if
brushed or bruised they give out a bitter greenish scent.  Under their
cover, well shaded and hidden, birds build, but not against or on the
stems, though they will affix their nests to much less certain supports.
With the grasses that overhung the edge, with the rushes in the ditch
itself, and these great plants on the mound, the whole hedge was wrapped
and thickened.  No cunning of glance could see through it; it would have
needed a ladder to help any one look over.

It was between the may and the June roses.  The may bloom had fallen, and
among the hawthorn boughs were the little green bunches that would feed
the red-wings in autumn.  High up the briars had climbed, straight and
towering while there was a thorn or an ash sapling, or a yellow-green
willow, to uphold them, and then curving over towards the meadow.  The
buds were on them, but not yet open; it was between the may and the rose.

As the wind, wandering over the sea, takes from each wave an invisible
portion, and brings to those on shore the ethereal essence of ocean, so
the air lingering among the wood and hedges--green waves and
billows--became full of fine atoms of summer.  Swept from notched
hawthorn leaves, broad-topped oak-leaves, narrow ash sprays and oval
willows; from vast elm cliffs and sharp-taloned brambles under; brushed
from the waving grasses and stiffening corn, the dust of the sunshine was
borne along and breathed.  Steeped in flower and pollen to the music of
bees and birds, the stream of the atmosphere became a living thing.  It
was life to breathe it, for the air itself was life.  The strength of the
earth went up through the leaves into the wind.  Fed thus on the food of
the Immortals, the heart opened to the width and depth of the summer--to
the broad horizon afar, down to the minutest creature in the grass, up to
the highest swallow.  Winter shows us Matter in its dead form, like the
Primary rocks, like granite and basalt--clear but cold and frozen
crystal.  Summer shows us Matter changing into life, sap rising from the
earth through a million tubes, the alchemic power of light entering the
solid oak; and see! it bursts forth in countless leaves.  Living things
leap in the grass, living things drift upon the air, living things are
coming forth to breathe in every hawthorn bush.  No longer does the
immense weight of Matter--the dead, the crystallized--press ponderously
on the thinking mind.  The whole office of Matter is to feed life--to
feed the green rushes, and the roses that are about to be; to feed the
swallows above, and us that wander beneath them.  So much greater is this
green and common rush than all the Alps.

Fanning so swiftly, the wasp's wings are but just visible as he passes;
did he pause, the light would be apparent through their texture.  On the
wings of the dragon-fly as he hovers an instant before he darts there is
a prismatic gleam.  These wing textures are even more delicate than the
minute filaments on a swallow's quill, more delicate than the pollen of a
flower.  They are formed of matter indeed, but how exquisitely it is
resolved into the means and organs of life!  Though not often consciously
recognized, perhaps this is the great pleasure of summer, to watch the
earth, the dead particles, resolving themselves into the living case of
life, to see the seed-leaf push aside the clod and become by degrees the
perfumed flower.  From the tiny mottled egg come the wings that by-and-by
shall pass the immense sea.  It is in this marvellous transformation of
clods and cold matter into living things that the joy and the hope of
summer reside.  Every blade of grass, each leaf, each separate floret and
petal, is an inscription speaking of hope.  Consider the grasses and the
oaks, the swallows, the sweet blue butterfly--they are one and all a sign
and token showing before our eyes earth made into life.  So that my hope
becomes as broad as the horizon afar, reiterated by every leaf, sung on
every bough, reflected in the gleam of every flower.  There is so much
for us yet to come, so much to be gathered, and enjoyed.  Not for you or
me, now, but for our race, who will ultimately use this magical secret
for their happiness.  Earth holds secrets enough to give them the life of
the fabled Immortals.  My heart is fixed firm and stable in the belief
that ultimately the sunshine and the summer, the flowers and the azure
sky, shall become, as it were, interwoven into man's existence.  He shall
take from all their beauty and enjoy their glory.  Hence it is that a
flower is to me so much more than stalk and petals.  When I look in the
glass I see that every line in my face means pessimism; but in spite of
my face--that is my experience--I remain an optimist.  Time with an
unsteady hand has etched thin crooked lines, and, deepening the hollows,
has cast the original expression into shadow.  Pain and sorrow flow over
us with little ceasing, as the sea-hoofs beat on the beach.  Let us not
look at ourselves but onwards, and take strength from the leaf and the
signs of the field.  He is indeed despicable who cannot look onwards to
the ideal life of man.  Not to do so is to deny our birthright of mind.

The long grass flowing towards the hedge has reared in a wave against it.
Along the hedge it is higher and greener, and rustles into the very
bushes.  There is a mark only now where the footpath was; it passed close
to the hedge, but its place is traceable only as a groove in the sorrel
and seed-tops.  Though it has quite filled the path, the grass there
cannot send its tops so high; it has left a winding crease.  By the hedge
here stands a moss-grown willow, and its slender branches extend over the
sward.  Beyond it is an oak, just apart from the bushes; then the ground
gently rises, and an ancient pollard ash, hollow and black inside, guards
an open gateway like a low tower.  The different tone of green shows that
the hedge is there of nut-trees; but one great hawthorn spreads out in a
semicircle, roofing the grass which is yet more verdant in the still pool
(as it were) under it.  Next a corner, more oaks, and a chestnut in
bloom.  Returning to this spot an old apple tree stands right out in the
meadow like an island.  There seemed just now the tiniest twinkle of
movement by the rushes, but it was lost among the hedge parsley.  Among
the grey leaves of the willow there is another flit of motion; and
visible now against the sky there is a little brown bird, not to be
distinguished at the moment from the many other little brown birds that
are known to be about.  He got up into the willow from the hedge parsley
somehow, without being seen to climb or fly.  Suddenly he crosses to the
tops of the hawthorn and immediately flings himself up into the air a
yard or two, his wings and ruffled crest making a ragged outline; jerk,
jerk, jerk, as if it were with the utmost difficulty he could keep even
at that height.  He scolds, and twitters, and chirps, and all at once
sinks like a stone into the hedge and out of sight as a stone into a
pond.  It is a whitethroat; his nest is deep in the parsley and nettles.
Presently he will go out to the island apple tree and back again in a
minute or two; the pair of them are so fond of each other's affectionate
company, they cannot remain apart.

Watching the line of the hedge, about every two minutes, either near at
hand or yonder a bird darts out just at the level of the grass, hovers a
second with labouring wings, and returns as swiftly to the cover.
Sometimes it is a flycatcher, sometimes a greenfinch, or chaffinch, now
and then a robin, in one place a shrike, perhaps another is a redstart.
They are flyfishing all of them, seizing insects from the sorrel tips and
grass, as the kingfisher takes a roach from the water.  A blackbird slips
up into the oak and a dove descends in the corner by the chestnut tree.
But these are not visible together, only one at a time and with
intervals.  The larger part of the life of the hedge is out of sight.  All
the thrush-fledglings, the young blackbirds, and finches are hidden, most
of them on the mound among the ivy, and parsley, and rough grasses,
protected, too, by a roof of brambles.  The nests that still have eggs
are not, like the nests of the early days of April, easily found; they
are deep down in the tangled herbage by the shore of the ditch, or far
inside the thorny thickets which then looked mere bushes, and are now so
broad.  Landrails are running in the grass concealed as a man would be in
a wood; they have nests and eggs on the ground for which you may search
in vain till the mowers come.

Up in the corner a fragment of white fur and marks of scratching show
where a doe has been preparing for a litter.  Some well-trodden runs lead
from mound to mound; they are sandy near the hedge where the particles
have been carried out adhering to the rabbits' feet and fur.  A crow
rises lazily from the upper end of the field, and perches in the
chestnut.  His presence, too, was unsuspected.  He is there by far too
frequently.  At this season the crows are always in the mowing-grass,
searching about, stalking in winding tracks from furrow to furrow,
picking up an egg here and a foolish fledgling that has wandered from the
mound yonder.  Very likely there may be a moorhen or two slipping about
under cover of the long grass; thus hidden, they can leave the shelter of
the flags and wander a distance from the brook.  So that beneath the
surface of the grass and under the screen of the leaves there are ten
times more birds than are seen.

Besides the singing and calling, there is a peculiar sound which is only
heard in summer.  Waiting quietly to discover what birds are about, I
become aware of a sound in the very air.  It is not the midsummer hum
which will soon be heard over the heated hay in the valley and over the
cooler hills alike.  It is not enough to be called a hum, and does but
just tremble at the extreme edge of hearing.  If the branches wave and
rustle they overbear it; the buzz of a passing bee is so much louder, it
overcomes all of it that is in the whole field.  I cannot define it,
except by calling the hours of winter to mind--they are silent; you hear
a branch crack or creak as it rubs another in the wood, you hear the hoar
frost crunch on the grass beneath your feet, but the air is without sound
in itself.  The sound of summer is everywhere--in the passing breeze, in
the hedge, in the broad-branching trees, in the grass as it swings; all
the myriad particles that together make the summer are in motion.  The
sap moves in the trees, the pollen is pushed out from grass and flower,
and yet again these acres and acres of leaves and square miles of grass
blades--for they would cover acres and square miles if reckoned edge to
edge--are drawing their strength from the atmosphere.  Exceedingly minute
as these vibrations must be, their numbers perhaps may give them a volume
almost reaching in the aggregate to the power of the ear.  Besides the
quivering leaf, the swinging grass, the fluttering bird's wing, and the
thousand oval membranes which innumerable insects whirl about, a faint
resonance seems to come from the very earth itself.  The fervour of the
sunbeams descending in a tidal flood rings on the strung harp of earth.
It is this exquisite undertone, heard and yet unheard, which brings the
mind into sweet accordance with the wonderful instrument of nature.

By the apple tree there is a low bank, where the grass is less tall and
admits the heat direct to the ground; here there are blue flowers--bluer
than the wings of my favourite butterflies--with white centres--the
lovely bird's-eyes, or veronica.  The violet and cowslip, bluebell and
rose, are known to thousands; the veronica is overlooked.  The ploughboys
know it, and the wayside children, the mower and those who linger in
fields, but few else.  Brightly blue and surrounded by greenest grass,
imbedded in and all the more blue for the shadow of the grass, these
growing butterflies' wings draw to themselves the sun.  From this island
I look down into the depth of the grasses.  Red sorrel spires--deep
drinkers of reddest sun wine--stand the boldest, and in their numbers
threaten the buttercups.  To these in the distance they give the gipsy-
gold tint--the reflection of fire on plates of the precious metal.  It
will show even on a ring by firelight; blood in the gold, they say.
Gather the open marguerite daisies, and they seem large--so wide a disc,
such fingers of rays; but in the grass their size is toned by so much
green.  Clover heads of honey lurk in the bunches and by the hidden
footpath.  Like clubs from Polynesia the tips of the grasses are varied
in shape: some tend to a point--the foxtails--some are hard and
cylindrical; others, avoiding the club shape, put forth the slenderest
branches with fruit of seed at the ends, which tremble as the air goes
by.  Their stalks are ripening and becoming of the colour of hay while
yet the long blades remain green.

Each kind is repeated a hundred times, the foxtails are succeeded by
foxtails, the narrow blades by narrow blades, but never become
monotonous; sorrel stands by sorrel, daisy flowers by daisy.  This bed of
veronica at the foot of the ancient apple has a whole handful of flowers,
and yet they do not weary the eye.  Oak follows oak and elm ranks with
elm, but the woodlands are pleasant; however many times reduplicated,
their beauty only increases.  So, too, the summer days; the sun rises on
the same grasses and green hedges, there is the same blue sky, but did we
ever have enough of them?  No, not in a hundred years!  There seems
always a depth, somewhere, unexplored, a thicket that has not been seen
through, a corner full of ferns, a quaint old hollow tree, which may give
us something.  Bees go by me as I stand under the apple, but they pass on
for the most part bound on a long journey, across to the clover fields or
up to the thyme lands; only a few go down into the mowing-grass.  The
hive bees are the most impatient of insects; they cannot bear to entangle
their wings beating against grasses or boughs.  Not one will enter a
hedge.  They like an open and level surface, places cropped by sheep, the
sward by the roadside, fields of clover, where the flower is not deep
under grass.




II.


It is the patient humble-bee that goes down into the forest of the mowing-
grass.  If entangled, the humble-bee climbs up a sorrel stem and takes
wing, without any sign of annoyance.  His broad back with tawny bar
buoyantly glides over the golden buttercups.  He hums to himself as he
goes, so happy is he.  He knows no skep, no cunning work in glass
receives his labour, no artificial saccharine aids him when the beams of
the sun are cold, there is no step to his house that he may alight in
comfort; the way is not made clear for him that he may start straight for
the flowers, nor are any sown for him.  He has no shelter if the storm
descends suddenly; he has no dome of twisted straw well thatched and
tiled to retreat to.  The butcher-bird, with a beak like a crooked iron
nail, drives him to the ground, and leaves him pierced with a thorn but
no hail of shot revenges his tortures.  The grass stiffens at nightfall
(in autumn), and he must creep where he may, if possibly he may escape
the frost.  No one cares for the humble-bee.  But down to the flowering
nettle in the mossy-sided ditch, up into the tall elm, winding in and out
and round the branched buttercups, along the banks of the brook, far
inside the deepest wood, away he wanders and despises nothing.  His nest
is under the rough grasses and the mosses of the mound, a mere tunnel
beneath the fibres and matted surface.  The hawthorn overhangs it, the
fern grows by, red mice rustle past.

It thunders, and the great oak trembles; the heavy rain drops through the
treble roof of oak and hawthorn and fern.  Under the arched branches the
lightning plays along, swiftly to and fro, or seems to, like the swish of
a whip, a yellowish-red against the green; a boom! a crackle as if a tree
fell from the sky.  The thick grasses are bowed, the white florets of the
wild parsley are beaten down, the rain hurls itself, and suddenly a
fierce blast tears the green oak leaves and whirls them out into the
fields; but the humble-bee's home, under moss and matted fibres, remains
uninjured.  His house at the root of the king of trees, like a cave in
the rock, is safe.  The storm passes and the sun comes out, the air is
the sweeter and the richer for the rain, like verses with a rhyme; there
will be more honey in the flowers.  Humble he is, but wild; always in the
field, the wood; always by the banks and thickets; always wild and
humming to his flowers.  Therefore I like the humble-bee, being, at heart
at least, for ever roaming among the woodlands and the hills and by the
brooks.  In such quick summer storms the lightning gives the impression
of being far more dangerous than the zigzag paths traced on the autumn
sky.  The electric cloud seems almost level with the ground, and the
livid flame to rush to and fro beneath the boughs as the little bats do
in the evening.

Caught by such a cloud, I have stayed under thick larches at the edge of
plantations.  They are no shelter, but conceal one perfectly.  The wood
pigeons come home to their nest trees; in larches they seem to have
permanent nests, almost like rooks.  Kestrels, too, come home to the
wood.  Pheasants crow, but not from fear--from defiance; in fear they
scream.  The boom startles them, and they instantly defy the sky.  The
rabbits quietly feed on out in the field between the thistles and rushes
that so often grow in woodside pastures, quietly hopping to their
favourite places, utterly heedless how heavy the echoes may be in the
hollows of the wooded hills.  Till the rain comes they take no heed
whatever, but then make for shelter.  Blackbirds often make a good deal
of noise; but the soft turtle-doves coo gently, let the lightning be as
savage as it will.  Nothing has the least fear.  Man alone, more
senseless than a pigeon, put a god in vapour; and to this day, though the
printing press has set a foot on every threshold, numbers bow the knee
when they hear the roar the timid dove does not heed.  So trustful are
the doves, the squirrels, the birds of the branches, and the creatures of
the field.  Under their tuition let us rid ourselves of mental terrors,
and face death itself as calmly as they do the livid lightning; so
trustful and so content with their fate, resting in themselves and
unappalled.  If but by reason and will I could reach the godlike calm and
courage of what we so thoughtlessly call the timid turtle-dove, I should
lead a nearly perfect life.

The bark of the ancient apple tree under which I have been standing is
shrunken like iron which has been heated and let cool round the rim of a
wheel.  For a hundred years the horses have rubbed against it while
feeding in the aftermath.  The scales of the bark are gone or smoothed
down and level, so that insects have no hiding-place.  There are no
crevices for them, the horsehairs that were caught anywhere have been
carried away by birds for their nests.  The trunk is smooth and columnar,
hard as iron.  A hundred times the mowing-grass has grown up around it,
the birds have built their nests, the butterflies fluttered by, and the
acorns dropped from the oaks.  It is a long, long time, counted by
artificial hours or by the seasons, but it is longer still in another
way.  The greenfinch in the hawthorn yonder has been there since I came
out, and all the time has been happily talking to his love.  He has left
the hawthorn indeed, but only for a minute or two, to fetch a few seeds,
and comes back each time more full of song-talk than ever.  He notes no
slow movement of the oak's shadow on the grass; it is nothing to him and
his lady dear that the sun, as seen from his nest, is crossing from one
great bough of the oak to another.  The dew even in the deepest and most
tangled grass has long since been dried, and some of the flowers that
close at noon will shortly fold their petals.  The morning airs, which
breathe so sweetly, come less and less frequently as the heat increases.
Vanishing from the sky, the last fragments of cloud have left an
untarnished azure.  Many times the bees have returned to their hives, and
thus the index of the day advances.  It is nothing to the greenfinches;
all their thoughts are in their song-talk.  The sunny moment is to them
all in all.  So deeply are they rapt in it that they do not know whether
it is a moment or a year.  There is no clock for feeling, for joy, for
love.

And with all their motions and stepping from bough to bough, they are not
restless; they have so much time, you see.  So, too, the whitethroat in
the wild parsley; so, too, the thrush that just now peered out and partly
fluttered his wings as he stood to look.  A butterfly comes and stays on
a leaf--a leaf much warmed by the sun--and shuts his wings.  In a minute
he opens them, shuts them again, half wheels round, and by-and-by--just
when he chooses, and not before--floats away.  The flowers open, and
remain open for hours, to the sun.  Hastelessness is the only word one
can make up to describe it; there is much rest, but no haste.  Each
moment, as with the greenfinches, is so full of life that it seems so
long and so sufficient in itself.  Not only the days, but life itself
lengthens in summer.  I would spread abroad my arms and gather more of it
to me, could I do so.

All the procession of living and growing things passes.  The grass stands
up taller and still taller, the sheaths open, and the stalk arises, the
pollen clings till the breeze sweeps it.  The bees rush past, and the
resolute wasps; the humble-bees, whose weight swings them along.  About
the oaks and maples the brown chafers swarm, and the fern-owls at dusk,
and the blackbirds and jays by day, cannot reduce their legions while
they last.  Yellow butterflies, and white, broad red admirals, and sweet
blues; think of the kingdom of flowers which is theirs!  Heavy moths
burring at the edge of the copse; green, and red, and gold flies: gnats,
like smoke, around the tree-tops; midges so thick over the brook, as if
you could haul a netful; tiny leaping creatures in the grass; bronze
beetles across the path; blue dragonflies pondering on cool leaves of
water-plantain.  Blue jays flitting, a magpie drooping across from elm to
elm; young rooks that have escaped the hostile shot blundering up into
the branches; missel thrushes leading their fledglings, already strong on
the wing, from field to field.  An egg here on the sward dropped by a
starling; a red ladybird creeping, tortoise-like, up a green fern frond.
Finches undulating through the air, shooting themselves with closed
wings, and linnets happy with their young.

Golden dandelion discs--gold and orange--of a hue more beautiful, I
think, than the higher and more visible buttercup.  A blackbird,
gleaming, so black is he, splashing in the runlet of water across the
gateway.  A ruddy kingfisher swiftly drawing himself, as you might draw a
stroke with a pencil, over the surface of the yellow buttercups, and away
above the hedge.  Hart's-tongue fern, thick with green, so green as to be
thick with its colour, deep in the ditch under the shady hazel boughs.
White meadow-sweet lifting its tiny florets, and black-flowered sedges.
You must push through the reed grass to find the sword-flags; the stout
willow-herbs will not be trampled down, but resist the foot like
underwood.  Pink lychnis flowers behind the withy stoles, and little
black moorhens swim away, as you gather it, after their mother, who has
dived under the water-grass, and broken the smooth surface of the
duckweed.  Yellow loosestrife is rising, thick comfrey stands at the very
edge; the sandpipers run where the shore is free from bushes.  Back by
the underwood the prickly and repellent brambles will presently present
us with fruit.  For the squirrels the nuts are forming, green beechmast
is there--green wedges under the spray; up in the oaks the small knots,
like bark rolled up in a dot, will be acorns.  Purple vetches along the
mounds, yellow lotus where the grass is shorter, and orchis succeeds to
orchis.  As I write them, so these things come--not set in gradation, but
like the broadcast flowers in the mowing-grass.

Now follows the gorse, and the pink rest-harrow, and the sweet lady's
bedstraw, set as it were in the midst of a little thorn-bush.  The broad
repetition of the yellow clover is not to be written; acre upon acre, and
not one spot of green, as if all the green had been planed away, leaving
only the flowers to which the bees come by the thousand from far and
near.  But one white campion stands in the midst of the lake of yellow.
The field is scented as though a hundred hives of honey had been emptied
on it.  Along the mound by it the bluebells are seeding, the hedge has
been cut and the ground is strewn with twigs.  Among those seeding
bluebells and dry twigs and mosses I think a titlark has his nest, as he
stays all day there and in the oak over.  The pale clear yellow of
charlock, sharp and clear, promises the finches bushels of seed for their
young.  Under the scarlet of the poppies the larks run, and then for
change of colour soar into the blue.  Creamy honeysuckle on the hedge
around the cornfield, buds of wild rose everywhere, but no sweet petal
yet.  Yonder, where the wheat can climb no higher up the slope, are the
purple heath-bells, thyme and flitting stone-chats.

The lone barn shut off by acres of barley is noisy with sparrows.  It is
their city, and there is a nest in every crevice, almost under every
tile.  Sometimes the partridges run between the ricks, and when the bats
come out of the roof, leverets play in the waggon-track.  At even a fern-
owl beats by, passing close to the eaves whence the moths issue.  On the
narrow waggon-track which descends along a coombe and is worn in chalk,
the heat pours down by day as if an invisible lens in the atmosphere
focussed the sun's rays.  Strong woody knapweed endures it, so does
toadflax and pale blue scabious, and wild mignonette.  The very sun of
Spain burns and burns and ripens the wheat on the edge of the coombe, and
will only let the spring moisten a yard or two around it; but there a few
rushes have sprung, and in the water itself brooklime with blue flowers
grows so thickly that nothing but a bird could find space to drink.  So
down again from this sun of Spain to woody coverts where the wild hops
are blocking every avenue, and green-flowered bryony would fain climb to
the trees; where grey-flecked ivy winds spirally about the red rugged
bark of pines, where burdocks fight for the footpath, and teazle-heads
look over the low hedges.  Brake-fern rises five feet high; in some way
woodpeckers are associated with brake, and there seem more of them where
it flourishes.  If you count the depth and strength of its roots in the
loamy sand, add the thickness of its flattened stem, and the width of its
branching fronds, you may say that it comes near to be a little tree.
Beneath where the ponds are bushy mare's-tails grow, and on the moist
banks jointed pewterwort; some of the broad bronze leaves of water-weeds
seem to try and conquer the pond and cover it so firmly that a wagtail
may run on them.  A white butterfly follows along the waggon-road, the
pheasants slip away as quietly as the butterfly flies, but a jay
screeches loudly and flutters in high rage to see us.  Under an ancient
garden wall among matted bines of trumpet convolvulus, there is a hedge-
sparrow's nest overhung with ivy on which even now the last black berries
cling.

There are minute white flowers on the top of the wall, out of reach, and
lichen grows against it dried by the sun till it looks ready to crumble.
By the gateway grows a thick bunch of meadow geranium, soon to flower;
over the gate is the dusty highway road, quiet but dusty, dotted with the
innumerable foot-marks of a flock of sheep that has passed.  The sound of
their bleating still comes back, and the bees driven up by their feet
have hardly had time to settle again on the white clover beginning to
flower on the short roadside sward.  All the hawthorn leaves and briar
and bramble, the honeysuckle, too, is gritty with the dust that has been
scattered upon it.  But see--can it be?  Stretch a hand high, quick, and
reach it down; the first, the sweetest, the dearest rose of June.  Not
yet expected, for the time is between the may and the roses, least of all
here in the hot and dusty highway; but it is found--the first rose of
June.

Straight go the white petals to the heart; straight the mind's glance
goes back to how many other pageants of summer in old times!  When
perchance the sunny days were even more sunny; when the stilly oaks were
full of mystery, lurking like the Druid's mistletoe in the midst of their
mighty branches.  A glamour in the heart came back to it again from every
flower; as the sunshine was reflected from them, so the feeling in the
heart returned tenfold.  To the dreamy summer haze, love gave a deep
enchantment, the colours were fairer, the blue more lovely in the lucid
sky.  Each leaf finer, and the gross earth enamelled beneath the feet.  A
sweet breath on the air, a soft warm hand in the touch of the sunshine, a
glance in the gleam of the rippled waters, a whisper in the dance of the
shadows.  The ethereal haze lifted the heavy oaks and they were buoyant
on the mead, the rugged bark was chastened and no longer rough, each
slender flower beneath them again refined.  There was a presence
everywhere, though unseen, on the open hills, and not shut out under the
dark pines.  Dear were the June roses then because for another gathered.
Yet even dearer now with so many years as it were upon the petals; all
the days that have been before, all the heart-throbs, all our hopes lie
in this opened bud.  Let not the eyes grow dim, look not back but
forward; the soul must uphold itself like the sun.  Let us labour to make
the heart grow larger as we become older, as the spreading oak gives more
shelter.  That we could but take to the soul some of the greatness and
the beauty of the summer!

Still the pageant moves.  The song-talk of the finches rises and sinks
like the tinkle of a waterfall.  The greenfinches have been by me all the
while.  A bullfinch pipes now and then further up the hedge where the
brambles and thorns are thickest.  Boldest of birds to look at, he is
always in hiding.  The shrill tone of a goldfinch came just now from the
ash branches, but he has gone on.  Every four or five minutes a chaffinch
sings close by, and another fills the interval near the gateway.  There
are linnets somewhere, but I cannot from the old apple tree fix their
exact place.  Thrushes have sung and ceased; they will begin again in ten
minutes.  The blackbirds do not cease; the note uttered by a blackbird in
the oak yonder before it can drop is taken up by a second near the top of
the field, and ere it falls is caught by a third on the left-hand side.
From one of the topmost boughs of an elm there fell the song of a willow
warbler for a while; one of the least of birds, he often seeks the
highest branches of the highest tree.

A yellowhammer has just flown from a bare branch in the gateway, where he
has been perched and singing a full hour.  Presently he will commence
again, and as the sun declines will sing him to the horizon, and then
again sing till nearly dusk.  The yellowhammer is almost the longest of
all the singers; he sits and sits and has no inclination to move.  In the
spring he sings, in the summer he sings, and he continues when the last
sheaves are being carried from the wheat field.  The redstart yonder has
given forth a few notes, the whitethroat flings himself into the air at
short intervals and chatters, the shrike calls sharp and determined,
faint but shrill calls descend from the swifts in the air.  These
descend, but the twittering notes of the swallows do not reach so
far--they are too high to-day.  A cuckoo has called by the brook, and now
fainter from a greater distance.  That the titlarks are singing I know,
but not within hearing from here; a dove, though, is audible, and a
chiffchaff has twice passed.  Afar beyond the oaks at the top of the
field dark specks ascend from time to time, and after moving in wide
circles for a while descend again to the corn.  These must be larks; but
their notes are not powerful enough to reach me, though they would were
it not for the song in the hedges, the hum of innumerable insects, and
the ceaseless "crake, crake" of landrails.  There are at least two
landrails in the mowing-grass; one of them just now seemed coming
straight towards the apple tree, and I expected in a minute to see the
grass move, when the bird turned aside and entered the tufts and wild
parsley by the hedge.  Thence the call has come without a moment's pause,
"crake, crake," till the thick hedge seems filled with it.  Tits have
visited the apple tree over my head, a wren has sung in the willow, or
rather on a dead branch projecting lower down than the leafy boughs, and
a robin across under the elms in the opposite hedge.  Elms are a
favourite tree of robins--not the upper branches, but those that grow
down the trunk, and are the first to have leaves in spring.

The yellowhammer is the most persistent individually, but I think the
blackbirds when listened to are the masters of the fields.  Before one
can finish, another begins, like the summer ripples succeeding behind
each other, so that the melodious sound merely changes its position.  Now
here, now in the corner, then across the field, again in the distant
copse, where it seems about to sink, when it rises again almost at hand.
Like a great human artist, the blackbird makes no effort, being fully
conscious that his liquid tone cannot be matched.  He utters a few
delicious notes, and carelessly quits the green stage of the oak till it
pleases him to sing again.  Without the blackbird, in whose throat the
sweetness of the green fields dwells, the days would be only partly
summer.  Without the violet, all the bluebells and cowslips could not
make a spring, and without the blackbird, even the nightingale would be
but half welcome.  It is not yet noon, these songs have been ceaseless
since dawn; this evening, after the yellowhammer has sung the sun down,
when the moon rises and the faint stars appear, still the cuckoo will
call, and the grasshopper lark, the landrail's "crake, crake" will echo
from the mound, a warbler or a blackcap will utter his notes, and even at
the darkest of the summer night the swallows will hardly sleep in their
nests.  As the morning sky grows blue, an hour before the sun, up will
rise the larks, singing and audible now, the cuckoo will recommence, and
the swallows will start again on their tireless journey.  So that the
songs of the summer birds are as ceaseless as the sound of the waterfall
which plays day and night.

I cannot leave it; I must stay under the old tree in the midst of the
long grass, the luxury of the leaves, and the song in the very air.  I
seem as if I could feel all the glowing life the sunshine gives and the
south wind calls to being.  The endless grass, the endless leaves, the
immense strength of the oak expanding, the unalloyed joy of finch and
blackbird; from all of them I receive a little.  Each gives me something
of the pure joy they gather for themselves.  In the blackbird's melody
one note is mine; in the dance of the leaf shadows the formed maze is for
me, though the motion is theirs; the flowers with a thousand faces have
collected the kisses of the morning.  Feeling with them, I receive some,
at least, of their fulness of life.  Never could I have enough; never
stay long enough--whether here or whether lying on the shorter sward
under the sweeping and graceful birches, or on the thyme-scented hills.
Hour after hour, and still not enough.  Or walking the footpath was never
long enough, or my strength sufficient to endure till the mind was weary.
The exceeding beauty of the earth, in her splendour of life, yields a new
thought with every petal.  The hours when the mind is absorbed by beauty
are the only hours when we really live, so that the longer we can stay
among these things so much the more is snatched from inevitable Time.  Let
the shadow advance upon the dial--I can watch it with equanimity while it
is there to be watched.  It is only when the shadow is _not_ there, when
the clouds of winter cover it, that the dial is terrible.  The invisible
shadow goes on and steals from us.  But now, while I can see the shadow
of the tree and watch it slowly gliding along the surface of the grass,
it is mine.  These are the only hours that are not wasted--these hours
that absorb the soul and fill it with beauty.  This is real life, and all
else is illusion, or mere endurance.  Does this reverie of flowers and
waterfall and song form an ideal, a human ideal, in the mind?  It does;
much the same ideal that Phidias sculptured of man and woman filled with
a godlike sense of the violet fields of Greece, beautiful beyond thought,
calm as my turtle-dove before the lurid lightning of the unknown.  To be
beautiful and to be calm, without mental fear, is the ideal of nature.  If
I cannot achieve it, at least I can think it.

* * * * *

BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD
